[Amit Varma]: What goes into the making of a life? Sometimes, when we look at someone at a particular point
[Amit Varma]: in time, it might appear that they are who they were meant to be. This could be hindsight
[Amit Varma]: bias in play. In hindsight, we see events following a linear path and everything seems
[Amit Varma]: bound to happen. That's never the case. But having said that, it also may not be the case
[Amit Varma]: that everything is random and anyone could be anything. We do have an essential nature,
[Amit Varma]: even if that essential nature is itself accidental, and the paths we go down on conform to that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, many of the episodes I've recorded in the last couple of years have been like oral
[Amit Varma]: histories and have an element of the memoir to them. And one common pattern I have seen
[Amit Varma]: is that my guests never planned to be where they landed up. When they were young, they
[Amit Varma]: did not have some grand bird's eye view with which they planned their lives. Instead, they
[Amit Varma]: were often locked into a moment they did something that made sense at the time, and one thing
[Amit Varma]: led to another. In fact, I invite you to think about your life. Are you where you plan to
[Amit Varma]: be? How much of it was intentional? If you had to do things all over again, what would
[Amit Varma]: you change? These thoughts came to my mind because this episode features a remarkable
[Amit Varma]: guest with a remarkable life. And speaking to her, it's clear that she did not set out
[Amit Varma]: to be remarkable to be a brave dissenter to go to prison for her beliefs. Instead, she
[Amit Varma]: always followed paths that interested her, that were authentic to herself, and to the
[Amit Varma]: moment. And then life happened. And here we are.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Trishta Settleward, who most of you
[Amit Varma]: will know as a human rights activist who has relentlessly fought to get justice for the
[Amit Varma]: victims of the 2002 riots in Gujarat. She succeeded to some extent, but the fight continues,
[Amit Varma]: and she even spent some time in jail recently, persecuted by a regime that she continues
[Amit Varma]: to fight. But Trishta is a lot more than just a bleeding heart activist, and her activism
[Amit Varma]: involves a lot more than the 2002 riots. She was born to an illustrious family of lawyers
[Amit Varma]: and could have followed in those footsteps and lived a plush life. She loved to write,
[Amit Varma]: and she was interested in politics. Her first published letter to the editor in 1978 protested
[Amit Varma]: the authoritarianism of Indira Gandhi. She joined journalism after college and was a
[Amit Varma]: reporter between 1983 and 1993. In that time, she covered various kinds of communal violence
[Amit Varma]: and realized that there was a deeper current in our society that mainstream media could
[Amit Varma]: not cover. She formed Communalism Combat in 1993 with her partner Javed Anand, with the
[Amit Varma]: aim of fighting communalism from all communities. They wrote about the horror of what the Taliban
[Amit Varma]: was doing in Afghanistan, about the plight of Bangladeshi Hindus. They criticized the
[Amit Varma]: Jamaat-e-Islami in India. And Trishta herself wrote five important stories on what was unfolding
[Amit Varma]: in Gujarat before 2002. She saw society getting increasingly fractured and warned about Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: exploding into criminal violence well before it happened. And when the 2002 riots took
[Amit Varma]: place, she played a part in helping the victims and in fighting for justice for them. That's
[Amit Varma]: a fight we know her for, but she's also fighting for other causes, such as the unseen chaos
[Amit Varma]: that's unfolding in Assam over the impending Citizenship Act. She's also a fine scholar
[Amit Varma]: who's been teaching young students about history and politics for over two decades. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: the thing that struck me most about Trishta was that she is both a thinker and a doer,
[Amit Varma]: and the thinking and the doing inform each other. She's had a rich life and has tons
[Amit Varma]: of insight to share on our country and our times. I loved her memoir, Foot Soldier of
[Amit Varma]: the Constitution, which I recommend all of you buy. And I love this conversation. Note
[Amit Varma]: by the way that we didn't discuss a few things that are sub judice, but there is still so
[Amit Varma]: much here to marvel at and to learn from. Before we start though, let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150, and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiauncut.com slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Teesta, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Great to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, normally, when I'm sitting with a guest, we go a long way back and talk about
[Amit Varma]: their childhood and all of that. But with you, I want to go even further back. Because
[Amit Varma]: just now at lunch, we were talking about Maharashtra and Gujarat. And you were telling me about
[Amit Varma]: how Maharashtra has so many different syncretic traditions. So it's not just the RSS strain
[Amit Varma]: of a particular kind of Hindutva, which is relatively recent, like you pointed out, but
[Amit Varma]: it goes back centuries. And equally, you mentioned how Gujarat interestingly doesn't despite
[Amit Varma]: producing outliers, I guess, like Gandhi and Patel. Can you elaborate a little bit more
[Guest]: on this for me?
[Guest]: Yeah, actually, it's a fascinating discussion in itself, because for many of us who look
[Guest]: at history and Indian constitution and law, not just in books, but in practice, have found
[Guest]: that this subcontinent, you know, the soil, this India, South Asia, has had a very strong
[Guest]: strain of resistance, if you like, of questioning of rationality, which goes back like, centuries,
[Guest]: centuries, it could even go back to the early Indian period, or even the certainly the early
[Guest]: medieval period, early Indian as well. Because if you look at the entire question of Buddha
[Guest]: Buddhism, Jainism, Buddhism, then of course, the resurgence of Shankaracharya, trying to
[Guest]: bind it all back together for the Sanatan Dharma. Then you look at the early medieval
[Guest]: and you have the Bhakti Sufi traditions and you have, you know, across the country, and
[Guest]: particularly Western, Central, North India, Bengal, East India, Northeast, this entire
[Guest]: business of looking at faith, spirituality, the individual, her or his space in it and
[Guest]: questioning and always looking at equality and non-discrimination through it, has been
[Guest]: there, has been very much there. I mean, you can name them, you can look at Basavanna in
[Guest]: modern day Karnataka, Narayan, Guru, more modern period, you can look at Kabir in Banaras,
[Guest]: you know, and we know where Banaras is today, and you look at Guru Nanak, and you look at
[Guest]: coming back to your, you know, your, the Western Indian, what I'm talking about, that RSS is
[Guest]: a very new thing. I mean, it's a new modern proto-fascist concept. It's, before that we
[Guest]: had Eknath, we had Namdev, we had Tukaram, and then we've had Phuleyambedkar. So the
[Guest]: argument for some of us is that the inherent values of the Indian Constitution, you know,
[Guest]: which formally came to us with the discussions around the Karachi Resolution, which was an
[Guest]: Indian National Congress in the 1930s, where Subhash Chandra Bose as president and Gandhi
[Guest]: as the mentor, but it was Subhash Chandra Bose, the agricultural struggle, the workers
[Guest]: struggle, the left traditions that influenced and pushed the Congress into making the plea
[Guest]: for fundamental rights for all, which included workers' rights and women's rights and rights
[Guest]: of all genders, etc. Those are not entirely foreign. And anyway, I'm not trying to say
[Guest]: that there's anything wrong with internationalism, because we know the modern discourse that
[Guest]: came with the French Revolution was also a metamorphosis across continents. But there's
[Guest]: a strong strain of our people, particularly people who are lesser privileged in terms
[Guest]: of class and caste, questioning the rigidity of caste and of privilege. And Basavanna talked
[Guest]: about gender in a very, very strong way. So, you had the Rashtra Seva Dalas worked on Maharashtrian
[Guest]: women saints of the Bhakti tradition, single women. And later on, we saw Nargis and Jogin
[Guest]: in the middle part of the 20th century, you know, and she was representing that. It's
[Guest]: the Miras and the Janabais and all of that, who took to the streets singing to their God
[Guest]: and said, we are not going to be living within the family, within patriarchy and within the
[Guest]: bonds of marriage or whatever. And you had the Gargi and Jayabala in the Vedic period
[Guest]: also saying that we have a right to the Vedic scriptures. So, there has been a strong strain
[Guest]: of this. And all of this is also metamorphosed into the constitution as much as modern ideas
[Guest]: of equality, fraternity, justice and non-discrimination. Now, between Maharashtra and Gujarat, I found
[Guest]: it fascinating because I speak better Marathi than, though Gujarati is my mother tongue,
[Guest]: but I speak and read better Marathi because this is my karmabhoomi, if you like, because
[Guest]: it's three, four generations we've lived here. But thanks to my paternal grandfather, I can
[Guest]: read and speak Gujarati as well. But I've seen that in Maharashtra, with all the rigidity
[Guest]: of a kind of Brahmanism and conservatism, which is evident in certain traditions, you've
[Guest]: always had this subaltern questioning and that has manifested itself, manifests itself
[Guest]: in reform. It manifests itself in something fascinating because I teach history in schools
[Guest]: and I try to go by what Fred said, that the classroom should be the, should be the location
[Guest]: for questioning and not for a one-way traffic between what you're told to be taught and
[Guest]: what you're told to be learned. He said in 1848, Savitri Bai Phule and her partner opens
[Guest]: the first all-girls school, possibly in the world, possibly in the world. And what is
[Guest]: the, what is the concept that in one class, you like girls of different castes and communities
[Guest]: studying together. Now, this is before you have the civil rights movement in the US and
[Guest]: the anti-segregation civil rights movement where black girls could also come into the
[Guest]: classroom. So, what does this mean? It means that there's a huge churning and an assertion
[Guest]: and that I think still survives in Maharashtra with all its other regressive tendencies.
[Guest]: Gujarat has been different and because of my work as first as a journalist, then as
[Guest]: an activist in Gujarat, I've always asked that what is this difference? Is it because
[Guest]: there was no strong anti-caste movement like you see in many other parts of the country,
[Guest]: particularly in Maharashtra? Of course, you had Narmad and his poetry apart from Gandhi
[Guest]: and Patel. Of course, you had Wali Gujarati, one of our, Wali Dakhani, one of our early
[Guest]: Urdu poets coming and settling in Ahmedabad and calling Gujarati his own land. It was
[Guest]: his tomb that was dug open on 28th of February 2002. But there's a mercantilism which runs
[Guest]: across communities. There is a sort of prosaic non-questioning that is prevalent, you know,
[Guest]: so that has affected things there. And therefore, I think for the project for the Hindu Rashtra
[Guest]: and the project for the masochist authoritarian state to revile and to discredit Gandhi in
[Guest]: the land of his birth, Porbandar, Gujarat was very, very important, has been very important.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of strands I want to sort of follow up on. And the first is this that if we look
[Amit Varma]: back through the centuries, if we look at that tradition of questioning existing structures
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, I would imagine that for most of our history, those would not be
[Amit Varma]: against the state because the state would be a very distant kind of thing. It would
[Amit Varma]: more be against power structures in society around you where you see caste play itself
[Amit Varma]: out, or you see gender play itself out, and so on and so forth. And this sense of this
[Amit Varma]: strong authoritarian state, which is like a distant beast, somewhere far away, how do
[Amit Varma]: you even rebel, blah, blah, blah, seems to be a relatively recent phenomenon, if we talk
[Amit Varma]: in terms of centuries. Has that dimmed the fire somewhat? Because just kind of looking
[Amit Varma]: back through the decades of our independence, one strand that kind of stands out is just
[Amit Varma]: one of apathy, one of inertia that you let things happen, you know, people almost become
[Amit Varma]: fatalistic. Now, it's possible that people were always fatalistic. And, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: a bit of selection bias that we remember all the rebels and all the countercultures and
[Amit Varma]: everything, and that those exist today as well. But is it that it just seems harder
[Amit Varma]: to fight the distant state, which you know, you can't beat anyway. So, you know, you just
[Amit Varma]: get on with things.
[Guest]: You know, I think it also depends on what history we read, and which struggles we pick
[Guest]: and which icons we remember. I've been fortunate through the work I've chosen to do, which
[Guest]: has not become a ninth generation, high profile lawyer that I could have been because given
[Guest]: the settler tradition, I could have been the ninth and you know, apart from maybe being
[Guest]: good at my job, I could have earned all sorts of money, but that's not the issue. The point
[Guest]: is, one chose a path of, it's not about activism, it's about interrogating power structures
[Guest]: at various levels. So, apart from the work I'm more known for, which is human rights
[Guest]: and fighting for justice in the courts, one of my passions is education and pedagogy of
[Guest]: history teaching, and social science teaching in the classroom. And for that, we had this
[Guest]: coach project, which we kind of undertake, and we are doing it in municipal schools and
[Guest]: private schools in different parts of the country. Now, fortunately, one has been able
[Guest]: to look at therefore, history and turn it on its head. And if I, answering your question,
[Guest]: if I ask you that then what made the Adivasis and the agriculturalists be the first challengers
[Guest]: to colonial rule, before anybody from the cities got up and found out even before Dadabhai
[Guest]: Naoroji's historic pamphlet on poverty? I think, because they experienced firsthand
[Guest]: what colonialism and to what extent colonial power economically and culturally debauched
[Guest]: them, you know, which is not to say earlier oligarchies, coming to your question earlier
[Guest]: oligarchies or monarchs had an equitable relationship with them. No, there was a feudal relationship,
[Guest]: they would take their share, but they left the lands alone. Okay, they left the lands
[Guest]: largely alone, there was a transactional relationship, which was, of course, iniquitous, but what
[Guest]: colonialism did was completely ravaged our land, our population and our people. If you
[Guest]: look at Indigo, Indigo rebellion, the Santal rebellion, I mean, I mean, I've been fortunate
[Guest]: enough to work with Adivasi, All India Union of Forest Working People for the last nine
[Guest]: years and I have seen firsthand those struggles and how they've kept their oral histories
[Guest]: alive and that has opened my eyes to the fact that we've really not looked at urban India
[Guest]: and upper caste, upper class India, liberal India has not looked at these subaltern histories
[Guest]: which have been manifest in challenging colonialism. I mean, that is why the land law was passed
[Guest]: in 1848, that is why the forest act was passed in 1927 because the British had to clamp down
[Guest]: on these struggles and if you look at the way the lawyers and the doctors and the names
[Guest]: you and I know or we knew in childhood started fighting for freedom and all of them are very
[Guest]: admirable, that happened like 150 years later, but these struggles had already been born
[Guest]: and were being challenged and they lost lives at huge cost, you know, there's Birsa Munda,
[Guest]: there's named from Assam to Maharashtra to Karnataka and these are modern-day constructs,
[Guest]: but to Bengal huge, Tibhaga struggle to Telangana, modern-day Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, you
[Guest]: had the agriculturalists and the Adivasis challenging colonial powers like nobody else
[Guest]: did, you know. So, I think that is a very important thing to remember in terms of answering
[Guest]: your question. I think a point will come when I think even with this fractured values that
[Guest]: neoliberalism has caused us where all of us are in little aspirational bubbles and it's
[Guest]: not easy to collectively organize or unionize or protest anymore, traditionally protest
[Guest]: anymore. I think a time will come and I just hope that human cost is not too high by then
[Guest]: when people will just find what's happening is too much, just too much, even though the
[Guest]: state is, it's not distant ever. The state is never distant. In fact, today the state
[Guest]: appears very oppressive and very intrusive just like the colonial state was and I think
[Guest]: what we are experiencing today is a kind of neo-colonialism really because if you look
[Guest]: at the corporatization on the one hand and the snatching away of civil rights on the
[Guest]: other and of course minority rights being right out there first, that's what we are
[Guest]: seeing. So, and constitutionalism and what the freedom struggle fought for is being turned
[Guest]: on its head. So, Ambedkar becomes an icon for the regime and yet the collected works
[Guest]: of Ambedkar, 18 volumes are sold without the six critical volumes at the Delhi Book Fair
[Guest]: which is the most and which are those caste and minorities, sorry state and minorities,
[Guest]: annihilation of caste, riddles in Hinduism, the most critical books of Ambedkar when it
[Guest]: comes to the Hindu religious and social structure are not part of the official volume sold by
[Guest]: the government of India anymore. So, you are picking and choosing, you can't ignore Ambedkar,
[Guest]: you can't ignore Bhagat Singh, you can't ignore Subhash Chandra Bose. So, you pick
[Guest]: and choose and you appropriate them and you try and hollow them out. The essence of these
[Guest]: people was what they stood for. I mean Bhagat Singh's writing on the dangers of communalism
[Guest]: of all kinds, Ambedkar's writing on not just the caste question but also on communalism
[Guest]: and the state majoritarian project and why even I feel like really looking at Gandhi's
[Guest]: stand on the communal award and the communal electorate because I think Ambedkar was right
[Guest]: in saying that reserved constituencies should allow that section to vote for that section
[Guest]: because otherwise you won't have representation of Dalits and minorities in Parliament and
[Guest]: we are seeing that. So, so many issues get thrown up and I think a time will come when
[Guest]: I think the apathy will be overcome by the sheer intrusion of the horror that the state
[Guest]: is undertaking at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: So, number of strands to go down on but it's interesting you should mention about how people
[Amit Varma]: are trying to appropriate Ambedkar and Bhagat Singh and so on because we are recording this
[Amit Varma]: on October 27th and just yesterday there was this announcement of you know Arvind Kejriwal
[Amit Varma]: saying we must have Laxmi and Madhurga on the currency notes because our economy will
[Amit Varma]: do well and on the background there were these photographs of Ambedkar and Bhagat Singh and
[Amit Varma]: you know I mean what would those men have made of something like this and when I meant
[Amit Varma]: a distant state I didn't mean a distant as in it doesn't affect our lives. Of course
[Amit Varma]: it does. It's distant in terms of accountability, seeming accountability but its tentacles are
[Amit Varma]: all over us. I refer to our state as a predatory state. I'm fascinated by what you said earlier
[Amit Varma]: because you're right that you know what we make of history sometimes depends on how we've
[Amit Varma]: studied it and what prism we are looking at it from and what you mentioned about the first
[Amit Varma]: sort of pushback against colonialism coming from Adivazis and agriculturalists is not
[Amit Varma]: something I've really read much about. So, why don't you you know give me a little potted
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: I'll send you a booklet which we co-drafted that is one of my mentors who's taught me
[Guest]: so much Ashok Ashok Choudhury who's the part of this union and myself he was kind enough
[Guest]: to say that I should get a joint byline for it though I think he did a lot of the work
[Amit Varma]: I did.
[Guest]: Is it downloadable? So, I'll put it in the show notes and my listeners can download it.
[Guest]: So, we've done a chapter for this book that is a part of a foreign university publication
[Guest]: and we also brought out a booklet for the union and CJP and I think it's very important
[Guest]: to look at this because it tells us four or five things it tells us first of all that
[Guest]: coming back to your question that this history is very important history of struggle because
[Guest]: the history of struggle is the history of actually obtaining your rights and that's
[Guest]: always a fundamental for any civil liberties activists which I primarily am that no rights
[Guest]: have come for easy no rights have come for free okay they don't come unless you there's
[Guest]: a struggle for them worldwide we've seen that from Africa to the United States to any part
[Guest]: of the world I mean even now I mean if you look at the United States there's still barely
[Guest]: a recognition of what they've done to their own American Indian people and that conversation
[Guest]: is beginning to happen in Australia to some extent with the with the indigenous and the
[Guest]: Maori populations and all and it's a painful conversation because it's not easy but I think
[Guest]: all of us particularly from the privileged sections need to have that because we we don't
[Guest]: realize to what extent that appropriation of resources has happened by those of us who
[Guest]: have come from from privileged sections so coming back to this you know during the COVID
[Guest]: period in fact which was otherwise a very difficult period because none of us could
[Guest]: travel as much we normally do and particularly going to some areas we undertook this exercise
[Guest]: of ensuring that all of us in the I'm not that citizen for justice and peace the organization
[Guest]: which I represent and also the other one of which I'm vice president which is the Akhil
[Guest]: Bharatiya Vanjan Shamjivi Union that the in all the units of the unions we should stay
[Guest]: connected and CJP helped helped helped hugely in this because we said that you know technology
[Guest]: is such a faraway thing and technology in the village and the Gram Sabha how do you
[Guest]: do it so we sort of did these zoom trainings and the zoom workshops I mean connectivity
[Guest]: India is very we think we are greatly committed very very poor if you look at the non-urban
[Guest]: areas so all of those were huge challenges we tried to overcome them and we started having
[Guest]: weekly meetings if what eventually became Gram Sabha meetings on zoom I mean I cannot
[Guest]: even tell you what that experience was because I could be sitting in Bombay or Pune or Delhi
[Guest]: wherever I was in that one camera that was in Sonbhadra in UP where Sukala was the president
[Guest]: of our union she's the most amazing woman she's been jailed twice in her lifetime and
[Guest]: unlike me when she was in jail for a month she didn't eat food she just survived on fruit
[Guest]: and milk I don't know how she did that so she would be sitting on her camera on a phone
[Guest]: phone camera with at least 150 women in the same room and each one would have their turn
[Guest]: to speak on the zoom and all of us would be able to listen so it was amazingly humbling
[Guest]: and democratizing process and through that we decided collectively that knowledge about
[Guest]: the constitution and Adivasi rights and the making of the Forest Rights Act of 2006 which
[Guest]: is our mantra for the Adivasi and indigenous movement because it's the law that came about
[Guest]: because of these collective struggles in the land and forest because it turns the whole
[Guest]: notion of elite conservation on its head that you can't really conserve environment without
[Guest]: protecting the rights of the people who've lived in those environs you know and because
[Guest]: they are the best conservers of that it's not a hostile positioning it has to be a collaborative
[Guest]: thing so when this started to happen you realize that they were also during the COVID period
[Guest]: commemorating their histories all the time so they were saying we will start our own
[Guest]: kind of schools which will be shifting schools which will be telling our own histories and
[Guest]: the histories of these struggles are alive to them we think that you know we have to
[Guest]: dig them up from the odd historian who actually has had the grace to look at Adivasi struggles
[Guest]: in English or Bengali and the Bengali translation or Hindi translation and there have been some
[Guest]: amazing bureaucrats also from the IS and earlier from the British colonial period who documented
[Guest]: some of these despite being part of a colonial hierarchy and you collect this information
[Guest]: and then you know these struggles are being actually today celebrated commemorated as
[Guest]: well they haven't forgotten them but then you give it a discussion gives it a deeper
[Guest]: form and a context you connect it up with today's struggles and through those exercises
[Guest]: that one and a half two year period and through that we saw the farmers struggle okay and
[Guest]: I want to mention this because it was an amazing thing what what happened to India during that
[Guest]: pandemic particularly the second half I mean you saw that from June of 2020 and then you
[Guest]: saw November 2020 and you saw how that I mean where was the pandemic for those for the farmers
[Guest]: who went and sat at outside Delhi you know and I mean they compelled and impelled all
[Guest]: of us to to look at their struggle and they brought history and context to their struggle
[Guest]: because everything they were saying particularly the BKU Ugran and all they were talking about
[Guest]: Bhagat Singh's grandfather and Punjab and you know what what the what the impoverishment
[Guest]: of colonial rule meant and how our policies are taking us back in that direction by not
[Guest]: by passing laws that are going to corporatize agriculture completely and leave the bargaining
[Guest]: power of the farmer out of the question so you know all these things are very very crucial
[Guest]: so I think for me it has been a learning through actually working with people's struggles and
[Guest]: having the humility to always understand that you don't know it all in fact you're in a
[Guest]: constant process or yes you bring something of your experience and learning to the process
[Guest]: and that's why it's collaborative and important but there's so much you need to learn actually
[Guest]: from people's struggle and you know like we were talking earlier that we are a strongly
[Guest]: oral history tradition you know and if you remember the Pathalkadi movement you know
[Guest]: which father Stan and others when father Stan died in judicial tragically died in I mean
[Guest]: to the judicial murder but that Pathalkadi's struggle was doing just this in in Tharkhand
[Guest]: you know what were they saying they were saying that we will on stones and on pillars put
[Guest]: up our constitutional rights which have been granted to us so whether it is schedule nine
[Guest]: or schedule five or the constitution or whether it is article the directive principles which
[Guest]: give Adivasi rights or whether it is a Niyam Giri judgment or any of the judgments that
[Guest]: the court has given us we will put that down so tomorrow when the forest official comes
[Guest]: and pretends not to know of these laws which have been passed by the Indian Parliament
[Guest]: we'll say we'll tell you we'll do a legal education for you you know and there is this
[Guest]: very strong belief that the constitution is ours among people of this country that the
[Guest]: laws the progressive laws passed the recognition of land rights recognition of forest rights
[Guest]: the land acquisition law which was amended and by the UPA to government before the present
[Guest]: regime overturned it again all of these were not because the UPA to government wanted to
[Guest]: give it it was because there was being a coalition government being not a authoritarian strong
[Guest]: government they were compelled to listen to voices from the ground and that's what a democracy
[Guest]: is so I think coming back to your question of history and Adivasi history it all boils
[Guest]: down to working with communities on an equitable basis equal basis and realizing that any struggle
[Guest]: that you're involved in today has to hark back to your past because eventually you are
[Guest]: based on your symbolisms your I mean the strong women's presence in Adivasi struggles has
[Guest]: been there from the beginning the very strong women's presence number of women lost to the
[Guest]: battle against communal colonialism has been huge they know the names they know the name
[Guest]: they sing songs to them they know that they advocated education for the kids they educated
[Guest]: the rights over forest produce and that it should not that should not go to the colonial
[Guest]: powers and the forest bureaucracy but unfortunately there's always been this distance between
[Guest]: urban and rural and Adivasi and non-Adivasi and hence it's taken a while for the rest
[Guest]: of us to open our eyes to it.
[Amit Varma]: So there are about five different directions I want to digress in but I'll just pick one
[Amit Varma]: and digress in that and it's a slightly long-winded question which I've explored in past episodes
[Amit Varma]: with different people there are two kinds of forces that we have seen in modern times
[Amit Varma]: and the first force which comes with urbanization and capitalism and all of those with all their
[Amit Varma]: you know other positive effects is of a certain kind of homogenization which leads to a loss
[Amit Varma]: in diversity I mean one metaphor for this is a Cavendish banana which is of course a
[Amit Varma]: banana that we exported to the world and then you know it made sense in the US economies
[Amit Varma]: of scale whatever then it was brought back to India and now it is kind of killing all
[Amit Varma]: indigenous sorts of bananas and that's an example with bananas where your diversity
[Amit Varma]: is driven out and everything is becoming homogeneous and rice is the same and I had assumed that
[Amit Varma]: there's a similar thing happening with languages and dialects like one of my previous guests
[Amit Varma]: Vinay Singhal not the Hindutva Vinay Singhal this is a young entrepreneur who runs a company
[Amit Varma]: called Stage what he once told me ki you know bhasha sheher mein hoti hai boli sheher ke
[Amit Varma]: bahar hoti hai you know the languages of the city the dialects are outside and I had assumed
[Amit Varma]: and lamented that the logical direction is going to be that dialects are gradually going
[Amit Varma]: to die out because when a young person who is from a village goes to a city the incentives
[Amit Varma]: will be to fit in and to speak in their dominant language so you might forget your dialect
[Amit Varma]: of Hindi and speak Hindi and gradually that's what happens what Vinay is doing with a stage
[Amit Varma]: is demonstrating the opposite effect where a stage is an OTT for Bharat but it's not
[Amit Varma]: an OTT for Indian languages like Hindi and Punjabi it's an OTT for dialects like Haryanvi
[Amit Varma]: and Rajasthani and is doing incredibly well and again capitalism playing a part technology
[Amit Varma]: playing a part that individuals are being empowered with the means of production and
[Amit Varma]: in some cases perhaps a means of communication where they can keep their culture alive where
[Amit Varma]: things don't have to scale it's almost an opposite of these forces of homogenization
[Amit Varma]: and I want to ask you about this because when you speak of all these different oral history
[Amit Varma]: traditions stories that have come down the danger always is that these stories will be
[Amit Varma]: lost because you move to a city or you know gradually over time things erode and things
[Amit Varma]: wither away and God knows how much we've lost but then there is also the hope that people
[Amit Varma]: will instead of being embarrassed by their origins can take pride in it can find community
[Amit Varma]: in it and and can you know take it into a different direction so it's not a very well
[Amit Varma]: articulated question slightly long-winded but just looking at these two forces since
[Amit Varma]: you work so much at the grassroots and on the ground with such a wide variety of people
[Amit Varma]: what is your sense of this that is it something that we should be hopeful that people who
[Amit Varma]: earlier did not have a voice or a way to preserve their memories and their traditions do they
[Guest]: now have more of it I come back to this whole business of history and I've learned so much
[Guest]: from many of our most renowned historians whether it is Romila, Thapar, Rocky and Panikkar
[Guest]: and I'm talking about the 80s 80s and 90s when we used to hold workshops with them first
[Guest]: to learn and then I organized workshops with them for teachers and you've got a great interview
[Guest]: of Romila ji also I'll link that from the show notes for me the most I mean and for
[Guest]: them I organized three workshops where they came and actually interacted with the school
[Guest]: teachers from about maybe 40 schools in Bombay two schools each and three four days they
[Guest]: interacted and so and my thought behind that because Khoj the pedagogy of Khoj was evolving
[Guest]: at that stage now we've got about 54 modules going and resources permitting we can do that
[Guest]: or we can't do that kind of workshop all the time but we are editing it and we're trying
[Guest]: to make it available so we can use that input idea being that the those original thinkers
[Guest]: and historians who are actually looking at history in a particular way should interact
[Guest]: directly with the carriers of that history into the classroom so that that pedagogy of
[Guest]: a non-didactic teaching not no final full stop always a question mark have the humility
[Guest]: and courage to say you don't know something and you look it up and come back and the child
[Guest]: will respect you more the young mind will respect you more not less all of that went
[Guest]: into this exercise so I remember those kind of early days when I was also sort of learning
[Guest]: all this and I'm still learning is that they would say that you know and that's when Narcissus
[Guest]: of course it's going to be 100 years old in 1925 into 2025 so it's worked very hard for
[Guest]: what it's done apart from acting having obnoxious amounts of money which it shouldn't have but
[Guest]: that's not the point that one of the bulwarks against authoritarian supremacism is local
[Guest]: histories and diversity and pluralism okay this was always what we said and came up with
[Guest]: at the end of these discussions and workshops that and we need to do this at various levels
[Guest]: we need to do it as at the at the finer academic historical level where there's a certain rigor
[Guest]: of the discipline where local histories emerge and maybe even contradict the national narrative
[Guest]: doesn't matter let the let the dialectic emerge but we also need to do the level of people
[Guest]: and communities which is the question you are asking so I think it's very important
[Guest]: and this continues to be a passion for some of us you know and we are also doing so many
[Guest]: things that it doesn't always happen the way we want it to happen but but wherever I go
[Guest]: wherever I speak into workshops speak about civil rights liberties I keep trying to say
[Guest]: that put together a group of citizens whether it's Belgaum whether it is Mangalore whether
[Guest]: it is Chiplun a tiny seaside town in Maharashtra put together you'll always have those 10-15
[Guest]: people 5 people 4 people who are obsessed with your past and your history and your tradition
[Guest]: put them together meet regularly start documenting and put it out you know because I think that
[Guest]: is our only bulwark against this this top-down homogenization which has a sinister political
[Guest]: motive without question I think this is what we've tried to bring into the coach classroom
[Guest]: and if you give me a few minutes I want to share this because it was fascinating for
[Guest]: us when we evolved these modules and one of the modules is which we do I mean unfortunately
[Guest]: because they're dealing with India school structure and the classroom and we don't make
[Guest]: it a honeymoon experiment with those special schools we've we've decided to look at the
[Guest]: school as it is for everybody you know which is a problem but we have to tackle it so we've
[Guest]: tried to do it in middle school like 5th 6th 7th a three-year program not not necessarily
[Guest]: go 8th and 9th only special classes because the whole exam pressure gets too much etc
[Guest]: so towards the end between the 6th and 7th we do this migratory history model you know
[Guest]: which is my history the child's history the idea is to introduce to the young mind which
[Guest]: is about 10 11 12 by then 11 12 by then that let's explore your family history each each
[Guest]: each one of you need to explore your history and how do you we don't finish it in one class
[Guest]: ever it goes through three or four sessions once a week maybe you come back to it even
[Guest]: a month later two months later idea is ask questions in your family and in your community
[Guest]: where are we from which village which district which state which language do we speak do
[Guest]: we have connections with that with that place still do we go back if not where did we directly
[Guest]: come from there to Mumbai or Pune wherever the class is being held or did we go somewhere
[Guest]: in between and start chasing this start chasing it make notes jot it down if you ask enough
[Guest]: questions you'll find a couple of people who are willing to kind of wax eloquent about
[Guest]: this once you get them to wax eloquent cross check the sources a little bit cross check
[Guest]: with two three people the facts and all that and start penning this history migratory history
[Guest]: of say Dhruv Prajapati or whatever the name is and start writing it down and then at the
[Guest]: end of nine months one and a half years whenever it's ready when these are sort of shared in
[Guest]: a live classroom atmosphere I cannot begin to even describe to you what happens in the
[Guest]: classroom because the entire temperature changes the classroom sort of almost becomes from
[Guest]: a kind of a uniform straight in a line benches it suddenly becomes multicolored colorful
[Guest]: somebody brings in a Kannada word somebody brings in a Telugu word Tulu word Urdu couplet
[Guest]: a funny story a tragic story and the diversity is really lived and felt because that's how
[Guest]: all our realities are whether Mumbai might be more than that some cities might be less
[Guest]: but I show me one one one classroom any part of India or the world where this diversity
[Guest]: does not exist we are all we are all migrated from somewhere to somewhere we are all creatures
[Guest]: of movement and travel that's what human beings are and maybe some are not but even that is
[Guest]: very interesting so I think that whole concept that you understand each other through the
[Guest]: story through the language through the past through the present is very important for
[Guest]: the young mind to develop and if you do that I feel and that's been one of our reasons
[Guest]: why we are doing COGE even now after 20 32 years is that it's a very small thing it it
[Guest]: it'll take a long time but but but the young minds who go through it never give up that
[Guest]: questioning and I don't believe in this business of teaching secularism or teaching the Constitution
[Guest]: you can't do what you can do is if you want to share an understanding of article 14 and
[Guest]: 15 which is equality and non-discrimination then you have to teach them about discrimination
[Guest]: share stories about discrimination and struggles against discrimination so that's the only
[Guest]: be a sense of what that article is will actually take root in that young mind and then you
[Guest]: at the end of 13 years might get a citizen that is a questioning citizen and not just
[Guest]: somebody who's looking for job and pay hikes so I think that has been the that has been
[Guest]: the basis of this whole thing when we look at homogenization when we look at authoritarianism
[Guest]: it's all connected why is there this obsession whether you look at the fundamentalism of
[Guest]: political Islam or whether you look at Hindutva or if you look at extremely rigid Buddhism
[Guest]: that Sri Lanka also threw up when it massacred so many Tamils and not Sri Lanka why is this
[Guest]: obsession with homogenizing and uniformity it's as if it's as if diversity itself is
[Guest]: a threat and therefore the patriarchy comes in the rigidity comes in the attacks on women
[Guest]: come in all of this so I think the ability to connect some of all of these things is
[Guest]: very very important and can we do that can we do that in our struggles can we form alliances
[Guest]: in our struggles this has been an abiding concern and question and I don't think we've
[Guest]: always succeeded but I think the effort itself is very important effort itself is very important
[Guest]: because you're able to see that not just this struggle which you've taken up just now is
[Guest]: important of course it is but there are also many other myriad struggles that need to be
[Guest]: looked at to be able to question this absolutely crude homogenization that we are seeing.
[Amit Varma]: I find this story you've told of the magic you created in the classroom very resonant
[Amit Varma]: because it feeds in with a theme that I think about a fair bit which is the importance of
[Amit Varma]: the concrete in our lives like what often happens is that if we just think in terms
[Amit Varma]: of abstractions like nationalism or purity or race or the other or Hindu or Muslim those
[Amit Varma]: abstractions can be dangerous and can lead us down you know problematic paths but the
[Amit Varma]: moment you make it concrete and I see that's what's happening in this classroom that's
[Amit Varma]: what it seems like to me that it's almost like a show don't tell brought to life that
[Amit Varma]: each child is making herself concrete by talking about her past and where she's come from and
[Amit Varma]: you know showing her authentic self also in a sense and showing the joy and that and everyone
[Amit Varma]: can then relate to each other in a different way it's a lesson about discrimination in
[Amit Varma]: the most beautiful way because it's a lesson about the joy of diversity which is automatically
[Amit Varma]: an anti-discriminatory lesson right so that that's a lovely story here's my next a digressive
[Amit Varma]: question and obviously that cliche is of course true whatever you say about India the opposite
[Amit Varma]: is also true right so we are deeply illiberal in so many ways gender caste whatever but
[Amit Varma]: there is a lived liberalism which you can you know see in our languages in our cuisine
[Amit Varma]: and our clothes assimilations from everywhere and you've also spoke at the start of this
[Amit Varma]: conversation about how Maharashtra has had much older traditions in the RSS which go
[Amit Varma]: back which are syncretic tolerant which celebrate you know differences but here's the thing
[Amit Varma]: my sense and we were chatting about this at lunch and it's a theme I keep going back to
[Amit Varma]: is that if there is one way in which I have realized I was wrong about the world it is
[Amit Varma]: that you know growing up in my little elite English-speaking bubble I always thought that
[Amit Varma]: you know India is broadly tolerant we are liberal there are fringes but that's okay
[Amit Varma]: you know we are what we are and my sense and I can perhaps get too pessimistic about this
[Amit Varma]: is that no that you know we are the bubble and society is always been extremely illiberal
[Amit Varma]: and these strands that we see in political Hindutva today they're not recent they've
[Amit Varma]: been like I did an episode with Akshay Mukul on the Gita Press and all fantastic book and
[Amit Varma]: all of these issues from you know love jihad and cow protection and conversions all of
[Amit Varma]: these were live issues exactly a hundred years ago as well right and if you see sort of the
[Amit Varma]: sales of the books on the Gita Press including their manuals telling women how to behave
[Amit Varma]: and innocent in sanskari ways and so on and so forth you realize that this is a very big
[Amit Varma]: in our society and therefore one begins to wonder about whether the experiment that we
[Amit Varma]: tried with the kind of constitution that we had was it bound to fail because what we seem
[Amit Varma]: to have done is we took a liberal constitution not as liberal as I would like but still much
[Amit Varma]: more liberal than society and imposed it on an illiberal society and assumed that the
[Amit Varma]: job was over that we are doing it top-down things will take care of themselves you know
[Amit Varma]: Madhav Khosla in a brilliant book an episode with me describes a constitution as a pedagogic
[Amit Varma]: exercise and it seems that politics has caught up with society and therefore where again
[Amit Varma]: I'd look pessimistically at what you said about at some point something's going to give
[Amit Varma]: at some you know I don't know if at some point something's going to give because the majority
[Amit Varma]: is having its way now who's going to do the rebelling it's not that society is being forced
[Amit Varma]: into a direction against its will or whatever you know this horrible direction that we are
[Amit Varma]: going in seems to be if the majority aren't actively clamoring for it they are perfectly
[Amit Varma]: content with it which is you know obviously it's a very pessimistic view and I know you're
[Amit Varma]: not so pessimistic so I mean what's what's your sense of this am I being too negative
[Guest]: no I just it's it's a it's a kind of expected question and it's a question that is that
[Guest]: needs to be asked if you like but I just would like to take a little bit of issue with say
[Guest]: the proposition that Madhav would make or whatever because I think it shows very little
[Guest]: regard for what went into the making of the constitution I mean to think that the constitution
[Guest]: or the constituent assembly debates that resulted in the constitution and to forget that the
[Guest]: constituent assembly debates had the partition bang in the middle of it and the fact that
[Guest]: the constitution actually emerged after the 150 175 years of the struggle against the
[Guest]: British I think it really disregards the entire sacrifices or the pains of the national movement
[Guest]: against British colonialism so I just like to contest that very strongly because I think
[Guest]: to say that it was a pedagogic constitution is actually to disregard that the what I said
[Guest]: right in the beginning that the values that were thrown up from the freedom struggle from
[Guest]: the national movement also harked back to much earlier struggles but they coalesced
[Guest]: in a certain way and they represented a large and vast section of our people in fact I think
[Guest]: the problem is with liberals who think that we are the cocooned minority but I think the
[Guest]: vast vast vast section of these people of the people of this country have actually battled
[Guest]: inequality and oppression of various kinds under British rule and they actually were
[Guest]: part of the movement against the British so I want to repeat that and I think therefore
[Guest]: the values that were then sort of nichodoed and put into the constitution came as much
[Guest]: from there as much as from the higher intellect as we like to think of it of people I mean
[Guest]: why was Babasaheb Ambedkar chosen I mean that question I think Madhav Goswami should also
[Guest]: answer because why was Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar a man a young man who when he was a young
[Guest]: boy of maybe 12 or 13 in the Elphinstone school Mumbai sitting in a classroom and a brilliant
[Guest]: mind and a maths problem is put to him and nobody in the class is able to answer and
[Guest]: he puts his hand up confidently and then the teacher is compelled to allow him to come
[Guest]: up to the blackboard to write down the five steps solution to the maths problem which
[Guest]: he does he solves it correctly and the attention of the class by the time he's reached the
[Guest]: last the answer is not on the fact that he's got it correct but the fact that a quote-unquote
[Guest]: untouchable has reached the blackboard because all their tiffin boxes are behind and therefore
[Guest]: they will not eat their food anymore because now it has been polluted now this is the man
[Guest]: chosen quote-unquote not chosen he's the man who obviously the person to write the constitution
[Guest]: and how can we therefore ever say that the majority of this country are sworn to a kind
[Guest]: of a majoritarian authoritarian deal no I think there is a certainly the subaltern there's
[Guest]: a whole section of the underbelly and that has grown from the meagre 0.5 or 10 percent
[Guest]: of the Jan Sangh once had to maybe even a 30 percent or 35 percent or 40 percent of
[Guest]: the population but I do not think that I will accept that it is a hundred percent what has
[Guest]: happened for sure is that the rest whether it is 20% or 60% we can argue numbers but
[Guest]: I think they have been silenced at various levels particularly the ones who are in a
[Guest]: position to speak one is a kind of a sense of self-preservation and fear that we would
[Guest]: not like to be the next persons who are a target whether it be through state agencies
[Guest]: or through any sort of vilification and there's a larger section our problem is the Indian
[Guest]: middle class which is just too obnoxiously large by world standards which actually does
[Guest]: not care one way or the other it does not care either whether we are going to be a democratic
[Guest]: constitutional state or an authoritarian state because it's navigating its life but they
[Guest]: are not the majority of the population they are obnoxiously large but they are not the
[Guest]: majority of the population so I think it's the fragmentation and the silencing which
[Guest]: is not letting the rest sort of come together in a way that would give hope to everybody
[Guest]: that something is happening if you are looking and working at the grassroots if you are looking
[Guest]: at the kind of the struggles in various parts of the country and there are myriads of them
[Guest]: I think one will realize that it's not an entirely hope it is fairly hopeless but not
[Guest]: entirely I'm not a stupid optimist but I'd also like to say that the hugest and biggest
[Guest]: abdication of the last decade and a half has been by the media and I think all of us in
[Guest]: some way or the other are products and have been associated with the media so I think
[Guest]: we need to understand what this means you know and I remember when I did these long
[Guest]: interviews with Sainath who's really interrogated this thing very very deeply and of course
[Guest]: there are many others that when you know he said it's not it's a kind of a triangle hold
[Guest]: on Indian democracy now through the corporatization of the media and the politicization party
[Guest]: politicization I mean media has to be political but you have if one party dominates the ownership
[Guest]: of the media and corporates and those same people are then now the dominant in Parliament
[Guest]: so then when he calculates like Sainath does that how many percentage of our parliamentarians
[Guest]: are billionaires and which industries do they represent then it's mining telecom and television
[Guest]: companies so then you know that the digital communications industry your commercial television
[Guest]: and your political representation is all the same and therefore you're unlikely to see
[Guest]: a debate happening there on what you were talking about which is a homogenized banana
[Guest]: or the rice varieties which are being completely finished off because of the kind of priorities
[Guest]: we are giving to agriculture forget a lynching or a Mohammed Clark you won't even have a
[Guest]: debate on homogenization of agriculture because it's not in the interest of you know the section
[Guest]: that would benefit from this homogenization who are sitting in Parliament to do that so
[Guest]: actually therefore we are talking about as in when and if the resistance happens in our
[Guest]: lifetime and I hope it does even if it doesn't seem very imminent is that you really need
[Guest]: to be looking at electoral reform judicial reform media ownership changes you know so
[Guest]: you need to look we need to look at judicial reform court and you need to look at so many
[Guest]: things being turned on their head which is like individual and collective struggles that
[Guest]: encompass all of this and is that feasible is that happening can it happen is of course
[Guest]: seems so overwhelming that we most of the time feel it cannot happen I mean just look
[Guest]: at what the election commission is doing look at the electoral bonds issue I mean it's so
[Guest]: brazenly non-transparent it is brazenly non-transparent you know and then therefore there's inordinate
[Guest]: hope that is required from the judiciary and will the supreme court cope therefore these
[Guest]: debates on who the next chief justice is going to be so all of this is we are looking at
[Guest]: these one two three places for us to get manners from heaven and to get solutions from them
[Guest]: all of this can only happen if there are these myriad struggles that are constantly pushing
[Guest]: these institutions to answer and many more people who are willing from the political
[Guest]: opposition to not say Lakshmi and Ganesh on the vote but to actually say we are prepared
[Guest]: to go to jail and let's flood our jails with the opposition doesn't matter if you want
[Guest]: to do it but we are going to raise some inconvenient questions we are going to raise questions
[Guest]: of the lynching of minorities the lynching of Dalits the attacks on girls in Uttar Pradesh
[Guest]: we are going to raise these issues even if it's inconvenient so there is a sense of despair
[Guest]: because of the quiet we see but I think we need to start looking for constructive noise
[Amit Varma]: and constructive struggles so we will talk about each of these one by one as we go along
[Amit Varma]: in the conversation but first there is a book by Rohit Dey called the People's Constitution
[Amit Varma]: which makes exactly that point that these are not just imported values these are lived
[Amit Varma]: values and they reflect in people's struggles in different ways let me ask you sort of my
[Amit Varma]: final digressive question before we get back to our chronological narrative of your growing
[Amit Varma]: up and your family and all of that and this one nicely segues into that because you know
[Amit Varma]: you said a little earlier that you were almost sort of the ninth lawyer in the family down
[Amit Varma]: the family line and all of that and it would seem to me that in one way you are doing exactly
[Amit Varma]: the same thing or working in exactly the same spirit as your grandfather and as his father
[Amit Varma]: before him in the sense that they were using their skills to work for a better society
[Amit Varma]: in the role that most made sense to them at the time right so flush after independence
[Amit Varma]: for example your granddad M.C. Settlebarth first attorney general it would have seemed
[Amit Varma]: that yeah I know the law this is independent India needs people like me and that is what
[Amit Varma]: an idealist would do and we find over time that that idealism and that hope in the in
[Amit Varma]: the virtues of the state have kind of vanished that we are faced with a much starker reality
[Amit Varma]: and it might and and you would obviously you don't know whether it's true or not but I
[Amit Varma]: imagine if your grandfather was born when you were he might have gone down on the kind
[Amit Varma]: of line that you did because you can't anymore make a better society in that way from within
[Amit Varma]: the system because it'll just corrode you and it'll eat you up and in a sense if you
[Amit Varma]: you know want to go down those paths you end up like your root in that sense feels natural
[Amit Varma]: like on one hand and and and that's you know a separate side question that how do we become
[Amit Varma]: what we become how much of it is contingent and how much of it is has something to do
[Amit Varma]: with our essential nature and on the one hand it might seem contingent different things
[Amit Varma]: happen you know your first journalism job you're covering those riots you're covering
[Amit Varma]: criminal violence on one hand it might seem contingent but on the other hand in these
[Amit Varma]: times what else could you have been is another question that comes to my mind yeah actually
[Guest]: that's interesting this I was just rereading my grandfather's autobiography my life law
[Guest]: and other things and there's a very interesting chapter in it on the Mundra scandal which
[Guest]: was the independent India's first huge financial scam and scandal and he was Attorney General
[Guest]: at the time and the fact that and the whole question of autonomy of autonomy of opposition
[Guest]: if I look at today with the Attorney General I mean today we have a very decent Attorney
[Guest]: General after many years but look at how the Solicitor General is functioning today it's
[Guest]: so crude you know apart from anything and so it tells you a little bit about how these
[Guest]: institutions need to function because he narrates it was the Chagla MC Chagla the Doan was appointed
[Guest]: as Commissioner into the scandal and he was representing the government government as
[Guest]: in state not in government in power so he and he had made that very clear and the entire
[Guest]: proceedings were in our city which is the old town hall where now the Director General
[Guest]: of Police sits and it was hugely attended by the public Chagla had taken the decision
[Guest]: that it'll be open and of course Settelbad was arguing and that all these evidence was
[Guest]: coming etc and the very interesting passages from there because obviously the dispensation
[Guest]: and that was our first Prime Minister highly regarded and it was about the LIC scam LIC
[Guest]: investing out of turn more than a crore of its capital on in private enterprise when
[Guest]: it should could not have done that without under the act under which it was formed and
[Guest]: without consulting its shareholders which is the public so anyway so of course the stand
[Guest]: that my grandfather took and then the praise he got from the newspapers and all of that
[Guest]: and obviously dispensation was not happy and including the Prime Minister was not very
[Guest]: happy with the kind of independence stand he took yet after the whole thing got over
[Guest]: and the T Krishnamachari was compelled to resign after the Finance Minister so it was
[Guest]: like a huge thing internationally as well he described the first visit to the prior
[Guest]: Nehru's residence after dinner because there were a lot of rumors that now Settelbad will
[Guest]: resign because he was Attorney General for about 12 years because the government is unhappy
[Guest]: with him and I think Nehru went out of his way apart from anything else to say that that
[Guest]: is not what he intended at all though he was upset at the time so it's both things you
[Guest]: see you see the fact that yes there was this tension and the tension was unfortunate and
[Guest]: should not have happened that you saw the Finance Secretary and the Home and the Finance
[Guest]: Minister and the State Bank Chairperson and the RBI Chairperson behaving in ways they
[Guest]: shouldn't have but you equally saw the Attorney General and MC Chagla and others functioning
[Guest]: above I mean beyond par you know and then he writes there that then you know after that
[Guest]: he talks about his father Sir Chimanlal Settelbad who my great-grandfather went because he cross
[Guest]: examined Dyer in the Hunter Commission and because of it that but for me it was so important
[Guest]: also to see about Chimanlal and this I'm hoping that his autobiography we are reprinting now
[Guest]: my as well because if people demanded but it's out of print is that he was a close colleague
[Guest]: of Babasaheb Ambedkar and in 1924 Chimanlal was president of what is called the Bahishket
[Guest]: Hithkarni Sabha which was formed with the aim of ensuring the construction of 124 hostels
[Guest]: for Dalit girls and boys because the whole understanding being that you know they're
[Guest]: left out they can't stay there because only residential colleges are possible so we must
[Guest]: have this and it's not just Chimanlal the entire trust the board of that was one Parsi
[Guest]: one Jew so different castes and communities recognizing the vision of Ambedkar of course
[Guest]: this is the tradition one has grown up very proudly with and knew about this but I was
[Guest]: very personally it was sort of assumed that I would be the one we are just two sisters
[Guest]: I would be the one who does law because my sister was not particularly interested I was
[Guest]: always very interested in the law and current affairs and everything but I mean 12th standard
[Guest]: changed all that 7th standard changed all that when I was about 12 years old when I
[Guest]: just a book that my father bought me actually all the precedence men and I said no I just
[Guest]: have to do journalism and I told him that one day in one of our myriad discussions and
[Guest]: arguments that I want to now do journalism I remember he didn't say a word he didn't
[Guest]: even say that there was no pressure no pressure at all he just sort of kept quiet for a few
[Guest]: minutes and then he said you have to do what you are most happy doing and I think that
[Guest]: feeling of being brought up in that sort of environment where you had a father who asked
[Guest]: him to call him by his first name he never asked us to call him father or papa or daddy
[Guest]: or whatever we always called him Atul both of us and he was very comfortable with two
[Guest]: girl children I think my mother probably wanted a son but because there were two miscarriages
[Guest]: after my younger sister but I don't think he was at all at all concerned that he didn't
[Guest]: have a son I think this also gets allows a lot of self-confidence to grow so then you
[Guest]: not only decide to take on a profession which is not this thing but you also ask questions
[Guest]: of your father who's told you once that don't study your kundra and your history textbook
[Guest]: read the history from your library that you're lucky enough to have because he had a huge
[Guest]: personal library of history and stuff then I would ask him but why do you have more Nehru
[Guest]: and Gandhi and Patel and why don't you have Avinash Ambedkar and Phule moment I was in
[Guest]: junior college so all that questioning and turning would begin your political my own
[Guest]: politicization in in Elphinstone College which again I chose because my father and grandfather
[Guest]: and had gone to that college so there was this thing of always being proud of that tradition
[Guest]: but also also being quite self-assured about questioning it and taking a different path
[Guest]: and I think that is also probably comes from that upbringing upbringing but of course you're
[Guest]: also your own person so even as a reporter I covered the courts immediately after doing
[Guest]: my university beat and political beat I was very keen on legal reportage and coverage
[Guest]: legal analysis of judgments so I think there was the attraction of the law and understanding
[Guest]: it or try to deconstruct it didn't ever go away though of course one was looking at it
[Guest]: from a different prism than a practicing lawyer you know and but I still will see and maybe
[Guest]: then you want to ask you something more is that I still have had the good fortune of
[Guest]: it through my work coming across a wide spectrum of lawyers who are existing in today's much
[Guest]: more difficult system than it would have been for my grandfather or my father and great
[Guest]: grandfather also that and we're doing such a fine dignified job of it you know and it
[Guest]: must be so much harder because we are facing a very viciously reprisal oriented government
[Guest]: and yet they they just carry on at great personal risk and displaying huge moral courage so
[Guest]: yeah maybe that's the trajectory I took but I'm so glad that there are lawyers within
[Guest]: in in our courts whether it is Gujarat High Court whether it is Bombay High Court whether
[Guest]: it is Delhi Supreme Court who are still there to be able to take up the causes that we all
[Amit Varma]: of us collectively espouse. What did your father feel of the work that you did like
[Amit Varma]: you've mentioned that in your book you've spoken about how he'd give you strength before
[Amit Varma]: he passed in 2010 that he was supportive and all of that but in general as your career
[Amit Varma]: took the parts that it did you know your 10 years as a full-time journalist 83 to 93 and
[Amit Varma]: then after the activism kind of happened did all of it feel like this is a natural flow
[Amit Varma]: of things that this is what she you know this is who she is. He was hugely supportive of
[Guest]: both me and Javed because both of us worked so much together my partner Javed Anand and
[Guest]: me very supportive of the work when we decided to quit journalism start formal mainstream
[Guest]: journalism and start Communalism Combat which was also an iconic magazine for the longest
[Guest]: time August 93 was our first issue and November 2012 was our last issue now we are online
[Guest]: he was very supportive but I think there was also a sense that maybe you know worry and
[Guest]: concern that maybe she's going too far and maybe she's challenging a system which cannot
[Guest]: stomach so much challenge there was also that sense of concern and fear as he grew older
[Guest]: he was also sick at the end of it so I think he was also very very worried so I remember
[Guest]: particularly from June this year to September when I was so wrongfully confined and in jail
[Guest]: one of the thoughts that used to come in I said that you know I never wanted him to go
[Guest]: so early but but I'm glad he's not there because I don't think he would have been able to handle
[Guest]: that you know the way in which I was picked up and the way the vilification has been happening
[Guest]: would have been really too much for him because he really believed in a different India where
[Guest]: the system cannot be he really believed that the system and the state cannot be so vile
[Guest]: and that's how it's become it's vile now so I think that is something which would have
[Guest]: been at a war within himself because he was from that generation that believed that the
[Guest]: that the state and the courts and the system will not reach that degenerate you know so
[Guest]: there's always that thing I keep thinking when I think of him though he was a huge huge
[Guest]: support I think was also a huge sense of worry he had and that you know where is this going
[Guest]: to take her.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned your your grandfather's encounter with Mr. Nehru and how you know your grandfather
[Amit Varma]: did the right thing and Nehru did the right thing and they were both in that sense upstanding
[Amit Varma]: but my sense always has been that you know you might be lucky at a particular point in
[Amit Varma]: time that you have people of great character but you cannot rely on that a well-designed
[Amit Varma]: system is a system that will function even if you have the worst possible people in charge
[Amit Varma]: and it is clear that our system is not a well-designed system it's you know it's too top-heavy too
[Amit Varma]: much power to the state and sort of in a sense the scales have fallen from our eyes over
[Amit Varma]: the decades you know my dad was an IAS officer as well and when he speaks about the idealism
[Amit Varma]: with he and his batchmates all joined and you know I think back on that and I'm like
[Amit Varma]: you know how could you be so idealistic right and today it's easy to say that in hindsight
[Amit Varma]: when you've seen what the state has become but the point is that that was never really
[Amit Varma]: going to last and even in your book all your actions represent a great faith in the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law a great faith that no justice will be done and we have to keep fighting for it
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth there are parts including in your book where you seem to show a sort
[Amit Varma]: of despair about where the system is like I'll quote this bit which I found very resonant
[Amit Varma]: where you write quote there is a lesson to be learned in the struggle for justice the
[Amit Varma]: system that loves the status quo tolerates interventions up to a point but appears to
[Amit Varma]: fall short of delivering radical real or substantive justice the system engages with the survivors
[Amit Varma]: and defenders in the early years but a shake-up of the status quo demands an exceptional judicial
[Amit Varma]: mind if survivors and defenders labor on for decades 15 years as we have done if we tried
[Amit Varma]: and take it beyond the small fry offenders somehow the system to keep us in check makes
[Amit Varma]: us pay stop code and then you went on to elaborate on this and it just seems to me and I of course
[Amit Varma]: tend to be too cynical but it just seems to me that that that ultimately all these institutions
[Amit Varma]: will be co-opted you know because just look at the incentives in play of course the judiciary
[Amit Varma]: will be co-opted of course the attorney general will be like a lawyer for the party in power
[Amit Varma]: you know of course all of this will happen everything will kind of crumble and and yet
[Amit Varma]: you keep fighting and placing your faith in this system and you know you continue that
[Amit Varma]: journey so tell me a bit about how do you reconcile these two like for your father for
[Amit Varma]: example was you mentioned that it was sad for him to see that the state could become
[Amit Varma]: this was so did you see that disillusionment creeping in him did you feel that it hurt
[Amit Varma]: him that in in some senses you know it's like Santa Claus doesn't exist and and and and
[Amit Varma]: for you did you also have moments of doubt where you said what is the point it's pointless
[Amit Varma]: you know like you know how how was that for you see when you're in a struggle and the
[Guest]: struggle keeps changing forms and needs to also adapt strategies and take new strategies
[Guest]: it's not always you can't always predict the path that the struggle will take I feel that
[Guest]: when you're when you're in the midst of the struggle and it's by no means over when it
[Guest]: comes to me or us none of it is over I think the question is also one of what is the option
[Guest]: what is the option once you're in the midst of it even if I were to allow myself to think
[Guest]: what is the point like you said or should I give up is that is that is that an option
[Guest]: at all because you're not representing only yourself you're not representing only an individual
[Guest]: maverick attempt it is part of a collective process that has metamorphosed into something
[Guest]: okay so can you just give it up even if you even if you feel more you're a more real person
[Guest]: now you're more grounded than when you began in terms of the experience of the system you're
[Guest]: more cynical even can you afford to give up that that's one question I'm placing on the
[Guest]: table secondly I think you also realize that there are different ways you can take the
[Guest]: same struggle forward okay which is that yes even if you look at certain aspects of say
[Guest]: targeted killings and communal violence and the accountability we demanded from the state
[Guest]: through a battle in the courts which was very rigorously fought and unfortunately was not
[Guest]: echoed by a political battle by the opposition of the same kind because that that's also
[Guest]: what I say in my book that when when the battle against proto-fascism gets limited to a battle
[Guest]: in the courts there is no way you're going to win it okay so that that is also a story
[Guest]: which needs to be that's also a strand that needs to be explored in our conversation that
[Guest]: why is the political opposition so wary about looking at some of these tumultuous issues
[Guest]: as part of election campaign hearing till that happens till we met can that ever happen
[Guest]: till we metamorphose into that South Africa did happen many many countries we've seen
[Guest]: those language of electoral politics take the language of a of an emancipatory struggle
[Guest]: whether it is a question of rights of Adivasis or the rights of minorities or targeted killings
[Guest]: that's not happened in our country yet even right to education does not figure as an election
[Guest]: manifest to battle so the issue is not just about these are settled word in the courts
[Guest]: or whatever it is about the issue the issue is okay you're trying to demand accountability
[Guest]: and transparency in heinous targeted killings based on hate speech and hate violence through
[Guest]: the courts courts have a certain conservative structure they're not diverse they're not
[Guest]: accountable they're appointed we all know that they're top-heavy they take too long
[Guest]: all of that can the battle ever be one only there yet if you look at what happened in
[Guest]: Gujarat 2002 even now with all the setbacks the kind of convictions we got has unprecedented
[Guest]: compared to 84, 92, 93, Meerut, Maliana what I'm trying to say is that and the question
[Guest]: you earlier raised which we didn't fully I didn't fully answer is that you know the post
[Guest]: independence what this what was expected of the state and what was expected of society
[Guest]: I think the state did some of it but not enough what this you mentioned about Nehru did the
[Guest]: decent thing he did a decent thing that one time about Mundrabad if you read Nehru and
[Guest]: the anonymous column he used to write in the statesman he said that I'm becoming more and
[Guest]: more dictatorial because there's nobody to question me in my cabinet and he then the
[Guest]: way he proceeded and you see a certain degeneration and you see whether whether it is inducting
[Guest]: family or whatever it is and the disrespect for federalism and I think that is the important
[Guest]: thing about the constitution which again has not been understood that it's a unity but
[Guest]: federal structure and we are seeing this noise is coming from the south we are seeing DMK
[Guest]: make that noise in a very considered way we are seeing the Kerala make that noise now
[Guest]: whether it'll be effective or not but it's a battle it's and eventually we are 75, 76
[Guest]: years down look at other democracies and how they've evolved is democracy the best way
[Guest]: even history will tell us that but but it has taken 200, 150 years for capitalist entrenched
[Guest]: democracies to even get their quote-unquote institutions to a level at which when Trump
[Guest]: is trying to capture that election which one and a half years back you have election officers
[Guest]: many of them women saying no the last vote will be counted you know which given America's
[Guest]: foreign policy is no great deal because they massacred people all over the world but at
[Guest]: least as far as that institution is concerned it gave me a lot of hope you know so I'm just
[Guest]: saying that it's a very complex battle that we are fighting it's a battle to deepen the
[Guest]: institutions of governance of democracy in this country to yet our structure of our society
[Guest]: and state is very very casteist classist and feudal or we did not allow the structures
[Guest]: of state to get you know to have representation as they ought to have had from the sections
[Guest]: that needed the most and deserve it the most in terms of if lived democracy had to come
[Guest]: in anytime any Dalit intellectual talks about and the issue of Dalit representation in the
[Guest]: higher judiciary they're shot down but it's a very valid question Dalit representation
[Guest]: gender representation minority representation why can't we raise it because it's a fact
[Guest]: that it's only when those representations come that you will have a sense of your responding
[Guest]: and I don't think it's about just identity politics it should be about workers about
[Guest]: farmers do we have farmers as judges workers as judges teachers as judges you know it's
[Guest]: all of these kind of cross intersectionalities that we need to think so I know I've gone
[Guest]: all over the place but what I'm trying to say is that the battle for accountability and
[Guest]: transparency the battle for from the state certainly can be more successful in the courts
[Guest]: if the courts are more accountable and I'm not running away from that question but it
[Guest]: cannot only be fought there it just cannot only be fought there and when we're looking
[Guest]: at communal violence or targeted violence against sections of ethnic populations caste
[Guest]: or community it is a kind of a I mean it's a historical reprisal as the section sees
[Guest]: it for what happened in partition and and that also shows a lack of understanding of
[Guest]: history because in partition itself if you look at the map of India and I'm sure you
[Guest]: if you taught history you do the same thing I'll teach history that way that you know
[Guest]: you look at it from the east to the west and if you look at the trajectory that maybe in
[Guest]: Bengal you had no Akali and Hindus were massacred most but in Bihar it was large sections of
[Guest]: the Muslims and in Punjab it was the Sikhs so it is everybody it is it's three communities
[Guest]: doing it to each other pretty much playing it out and that demon of communal politics
[Guest]: that actually sits within all communities and which at one stage you're a majority another
[Guest]: stage you're a minority is what we need to tackle that that's the hate politics that
[Guest]: we need to tackle and there's a danger of it becoming majoritarianism when it's Hindu
[Guest]: were here but equally Islamization in Pakistan or the Buddhist state in Sri Lanka so that
[Guest]: understanding we need to get among our people which means a strain of rationality and a
[Guest]: strain of questioning and the right wing the supremacist right wing is better organized
[Guest]: it's it has had its gold in fact it made it clear when it assassinated Gandhiji and that
[Guest]: was in fact my the first book I edited I don't know if you've seen it it's called beyond
[Guest]: doubt because I mean for me it was an eye-opener when Jagan Farnes's book I read in Marathi
[Guest]: in 1998 where I first as a student of history first his book was called Mahatmanji Akher
[Guest]: and he first wrote and it was his original work that there were five attempts on Gandhi
[Guest]: before before the last one that successfully killed him and this is not part of the dominant
[Guest]: narrative even now I have to keep telling people that did you know that there were six
[Guest]: attempts totally with a six was successful and in three previous attempts Godse was part
[Guest]: of it so it was not a spontaneous act it was pretty organized pretty well thought out and
[Guest]: all of it so I just feel it's all of this coming together let's look at the world the
[Guest]: world is also going very right has gone very right so it's not just an Indian phenomenon
[Guest]: there's a grappling all along and so much has to do with economic structures and you
[Guest]: know the the kind of path of neo-liberalization neo-globalization that the world took which
[Guest]: is now being questioned at some level if you look at South America and some of the states
[Guest]: there but have we reached a state where we are questioning it I don't think so because
[Guest]: if you look at what we are doing with the forest conservation rules what we're looking
[Guest]: at the kind of model of development so you know for civil rights activists also like
[Guest]: me we have to develop our understanding of economics and what kind of priorities because
[Guest]: I'm keen on reaching and discussing with the people who feel today that they are jobless
[Guest]: and hopeless and therefore they can sit and watch propaganda videos we need to reach those
[Guest]: people because they are the same people who supported Trump you know it's it's the white
[Guest]: American workforce that supported Trump and I think if that white American workforce is
[Guest]: feeling completely isolated and without job I cannot say that we can't speak to them I
[Guest]: cannot say this this is them it's not a them it's a it's a them which is being pulled there
[Guest]: because of a certain economic reality you know so it's a huge challenge for all of us
[Guest]: who are trying to work at the people's level at the struggle level at mass organization
[Guest]: at building up a political opposition we it we all realize also that we have to work with
[Guest]: the opposition we've got it's not going to radically change the way we want it to so
[Guest]: how do we make that happen how do we work with it you know these are all all very complicated
[Guest]: questions and then it boils down to okay what is your struggle and what is your choice and
[Guest]: do you stop what you're doing what you're doing and then I think the option is not there
[Guest]: to stop maybe you take a break take a different path for a little while but I mean for instance
[Guest]: I just wanted to share that apart from the school program the work we're doing in Assam
[Guest]: at the moment I don't know if you're aware of it it is looking at the law on citizenship
[Guest]: and the way it's rendering millions of Indians genuine Indian citizens a civil death because
[Guest]: that's what it is you suddenly wake up and say that you know Amit is not an Indian Tista
[Guest]: is not an Indian and then I have to just scramble around putting together documents to prove
[Guest]: my citizenship which is not even required under the Indian constitution and we have
[Guest]: a team there CJ my organization has been working there since for the last seven years local
[Guest]: team diverse gender diverse ethnic diverse working in villages and we're ensuring paralegal
[Guest]: and legal aid now according to me that's if that's a that's a follow-up trajectory to
[Guest]: what the kind of work we've done before with targeted violence that you're using the law
[Guest]: bottom up from the foreigner tribunal level up to the supreme court not just going straight
[Guest]: when there's an incident of mass violence but this is an everyday annihilation of the
[Guest]: people you know just rendering them completely non-citizens and I think therefore we it's
[Guest]: like using your previous expertise in a way where a huge humanitarian crisis is brewing
[Guest]: and when I was in jail and I found and this is what I like to just share with your viewers that
[Guest]: for a person who has never been looked at herself as an individual but part of a collective battle
[Guest]: to feel that the kind of organization building that my CJP has done and that we have now
[Guest]: teams working in Assam we have a team working in Purvanchal and we keep telling our supporters that
[Guest]: you know these are the teams we need to support it's not a thista or a individual but human rights
[Guest]: workers and peace workers on the ground who are able to take up these little and bigger challenges
[Amit Varma]: and that's when the change will happen. So I share your lament about the one point of failure in all
[Amit Varma]: this which is politics which is the opposition right and my question is about that now this
[Amit Varma]: this seems to be an assumption on the part of all the opposition parties
[Amit Varma]: that you cannot mess with the Hindu vote so in some way or the other they will try to you know
[Amit Varma]: cater to it maybe in the very crude ways that Kejriwal is doing that you put pictures of
[Amit Varma]: goddesses on banknotes or even earlier when the Babri Masjid judgment came you know Priyanka Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: boasted that hey my father opened the gates of the Babri Masjid there is this sense that you
[Amit Varma]: have to in some way show religiosity and so on and they seem to be making the assumption that ties
[Amit Varma]: in with my sort of pessimistic speculation earlier that this is what society is like politics has
[Amit Varma]: caught up with it and they seem to be treating it as a non-negotiable now is it the case that they
[Amit Varma]: are on to something or is it the case that there is a lack of imagination there that there are
[Amit Varma]: other margins on which you can appeal to people it's you know we all contain multitudes even if
[Amit Varma]: even if it is the case that religiosity matters even if it is a case that there is a certain
[Amit Varma]: shared bigotry there there are surely other margins that you can also appeal on and you know
[Amit Varma]: but this is a battle everyone's just turned their back on so you know so it's that why which I'm
[Amit Varma]: trying to understand that are our parties are these opposition parties on to something about
[Amit Varma]: our society which you know may give you and I this quiet and we may not want to accept it or
[Amit Varma]: are they just showing a lack of imagination that there is a space to fight extraordinarily
[Guest]: important question you know I can't tell you how important it is and I'll try and just do some
[Guest]: justice to it see I you know it boils down again to this I mean I like the way you put it that is
[Guest]: there a lack of imagination I think there is a lack of imagination if I believe as a as a Rahul
[Guest]: Gandhi or a Krijiwal or a Mamata or whatever if I believe that this is where society is that this is
[Guest]: there's actually everybody has now always been or has become so divided and so polarized that that's
[Guest]: the only language I can speak then I will keep perpetuating this lack of imagine but if I actually
[Guest]: and I think that's the other problem that if you look at the election figures of number of people
[Guest]: who don't vote I think that's a figure that really important to look at it tells a very
[Guest]: despairing tale it means a lot of people are just so disillusioned with what's being offered it's
[Guest]: not that they're going to this or that they just seem we don't want to vote okay then if you put
[Guest]: it together with those who are not voting for this regime I think the figure is pretty large
[Guest]: pretty large so I think it's lack of imagination to first say that it's lack of imagination and
[Guest]: that lack of imagination is not simply from what the way you put it that go to other issues I think
[Guest]: the other issues must be gone too whether it's unemployment or prices and all but I think it's
[Guest]: also about tackling diversity and secularism head-on and there I want to hark on something
[Guest]: which is something that people don't want to talk about which is that how did Javed and I start the
[Guest]: work we did from about 1986 onwards 93 we began combat formally but actually this whole turning
[Guest]: began in around 1986 I don't even know you were born then but it was a very incredibly
[Guest]: critical period for India I was a teenager then I'm just joking thank you for that
[Guest]: very critical period for India very critical period for India because you saw so many things
[Guest]: happening at the same time and if I just want to encapsulate those two three were one was of
[Guest]: course we you you referred to it opening what Priyanka said opening of the talas of the Babri
[Guest]: Masjid but not as as important was the reaction of the Muslim male clergy to the Shabano judgment
[Guest]: okay now this was within weeks of each other both happening within weeks of each other and we saw
[Guest]: as young journalists we saw that what awful effect it was having on the ground because the VHP
[Guest]: VHP had made this the Babri the construction of the Ram Mandir their program from 86 onwards
[Guest]: BJP adopted it a year or two later but the Shabanu judgment was like a manner from heaven for the
[Guest]: right for the Hindutva right because the manner in which not just the Muslim male clergy reacted
[Guest]: but the manner in which India's centrist party reacted which is the congress was was horrendous
[Guest]: instead of negotiating and navigating with the vast majority of India's Muslims
[Guest]: which includes its women you know they were negotiating with just a top heavy clergy
[Guest]: and the response they were getting in terms of the shouting and the hordes and the slogan
[Guest]: hearing was confirmed to that middle road a Hindu who had not gone over to that side
[Guest]: that yes this is a section that wants special treatment under the law and wants is not even
[Guest]: prepared to give 125 rupees for an old woman who's been divorced what does this mean you saw
[Guest]: minority communalism feeding into majority communalism exactly what led me to do so much
[Guest]: reading of my history pre-partition and I teach it now in the class to the 8, 9, 10 standards junior
[Guest]: colleges that we have to understand the trajectory of this country between 1857 1847 to 1933 and then
[Guest]: 1947 why till 1925 did you not see the emergence of these sectarian forces from both sides and then
[Guest]: what happens between 1925 and 1937 when you first have the Muslim League pass up a Lahore resolution
[Guest]: you know to believe for anybody to any critical thinker in India to believe that secularism can
[Guest]: only be two things that secularism can only be a battle to for Hindus to become liberal and to
[Guest]: Hindus to battle caste and that minority should not be touched I think it's not to understand
[Guest]: what secularization of society means number one and I think number two is not to understand that
[Guest]: historically this has always played up that minority communalism has played into majority
[Guest]: communalism and whereas of course I agree with Nehru when he said that majority communalism is
[Guest]: endangers the state because the structure of the state changes what happens to society when minority
[Guest]: communalism is given a free hand and is not tackled is that it's three or four things first of all you
[Guest]: don't give agency to the moderate liberal dissenting voices among Muslims you don't allow that
[Guest]: you don't allow that leadership to emerge and you ignore the Muslim women completely you know
[Guest]: and can you imagine something more horrific than the fact that it's under this regime that an issue
[Guest]: like talaq is raised when organizations like the Indian Muslim for Secular Democracy which my husband
[Guest]: partner represents has been talking against triple talaq polygamy and halal for like two decades
[Guest]: and yet you know the it's just completely ignored by mainstream politicians so this lack of
[Guest]: imagination encompasses even this that what is secularism secularism is not about giving Friday
[Guest]: holidays to Muslims or to give the prophets birthday as a holiday to Muslims that's not what
[Guest]: the vast majority of Indian Muslims have ever wanted it's like an insult to them the vast
[Guest]: majority of Muslims in this country are working class artisans craftsmen self-made people and
[Guest]: they're from the subaltern caste they're not from the Ashraf Syed caste who've been the leadership
[Guest]: of the opposition parties they have been asking for their share in the economic social cake even
[Guest]: within the community they haven't got it so I think if if political parties started articulating
[Guest]: what India stands for in terms of all of this secularism means this secularism
[Guest]: equality non-discrimination between various faiths and within communities as well I think
[Guest]: if you have the moral courage to do that and I can't see which leaders are very few there are a
[Guest]: few who do it in their own way I think it's it's possible that your disgruntled
[Guest]: hassle voter who doesn't vote will get inspired to say yes we believe we are like Muslims who
[Guest]: are secular we are Hindus or secular but we don't want this nonsense kind of secularism that you're
[Guest]: electorally peddling out to us which is meaningless we want real secularism and I think the real
[Guest]: secularism exists it's it's morally people are living it all the time Muslims have I mean if you
[Guest]: look at today's Muslim you look at the number of Muslim girls who are kind of educating themselves
[Guest]: they've not done it on a free lunch they've done it out of the battling patriarchy within the
[Guest]: battling patriarchy within the families but they just need articulation why is opposition
[Guest]: politics not keen on doing that and I think it's possible to do that it needs to and these
[Guest]: things need to be said I mean when someone like Tikayat the farmers leader in Muzaffarnagar
[Guest]: has that slogan Har Har Mahavadev Allahu Akbar it's a transformational moment
[Guest]: because all of us are wondering Rakesh Tikayat used to be a fairly reactionary big big farmer
[Guest]: but even that whole struggle and his interacting with the small farmer the middle farmer the woman
[Guest]: farmer the Dalit farmer and his realization that where is this politics taking us has made him kind
[Guest]: of utter those slogans you know even Mamata Banerjee when she was faced with a couple of
[Guest]: times during the Bengal elections she was trying to articulate Ishwar Allah Tero Nam this is my
[Guest]: secularism don't try and tell me when the I think the congress on the left hand try and put up an
[Guest]: ultra right-wing Muslim against one of her candidates so we've seen glimmerings of that
[Guest]: we've seen glimmerings of that but this needs to be an principled accepted position that we are
[Guest]: going to battle for secularism which is intrinsic to intrinsic to this country staying one and
[Guest]: united and that means no nonsense politics which talks about equality and discrimination so yes
[Guest]: much more imagination is required and moral courage so i used to find it a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: a semantic paradox where a couple of decades ago the BJP would go on and on against the congress's
[Amit Varma]: pseudo secularism while at the same time they had no regard for secularism either so it's like you
[Amit Varma]: know you're you accuse someone of being pseudo secular if you're saying that hey they're
[Amit Varma]: pretending to be secular but then one would imagine you want to be secular but that's not
[Amit Varma]: the case either i want to ask you a question about this then because you know you mentioned a real
[Amit Varma]: kind of secularism where you know you build that equality into society now one of the
[Amit Varma]: complaints lasting complaints of the hindu right has been against the hindu court bill
[Amit Varma]: saying that why are you only reforming our personal laws why not the minorities perfectly
[Amit Varma]: rational complaint to have and that is why also you know the ucc is the uniform civil code is
[Amit Varma]: going to be an issue at some point in time though you know there are other incentives
[Amit Varma]: obviously driving them towards that so would you say that part of the reason for the vehemence
[Amit Varma]: and the radicalness of hindutva coming up the way it has are also the mistakes that the congress
[Amit Varma]: made in terms of not being truly secular or being pseudo secular you know building that vote bank
[Amit Varma]: pandering to it so on and so forth you know what is what's what's your take on that whole debate
[Guest]: i won't use the word pseudo secular because i think it's a it's a it's an abuse term
[Guest]: but i think it's uh it was a hollowed out secularism that was trying to be uh tom-tom and
[Guest]: it's ironic that the same party that did that because it was a party let's not forget for 45
[Guest]: years uh also uh you know today even before kj val started playing its own version of soft
[Guest]: hindutva now kj val has taken it to another obnoxious level so i think obviously i think
[Guest]: that a lot of what happened and a lot of the ceding of power to the hindutva right has been
[Guest]: possible because of the mistakes of earlier parties without question but on this point i
[Guest]: really really feel very very strongly that so much ground was lot and it's not as if and you know it
[Guest]: was both things and i want to join that as well because this is something that the hindu uh
[Guest]: privileged castes and classes not all of them who support the hindu right need to understand
[Guest]: and were rightly angry about what the congress did on this score is that they also did not do
[Guest]: enough to protect the life and economic livelihood of minorities when it came to riots and all of
[Guest]: that so both things were happening so you alienate even the minority by not doing enough whether it
[Guest]: is an 84 with the sikh community or made at malayana nellie nellie was the first post-independence
[Guest]: massacre of muslims in in bengali speaking muslims in asa so you see you did both things that you
[Guest]: hollowed out the word secularism so much so that you neither like protected the life and livelihood
[Guest]: of the religious minority as stringently as you should have done and equally well you hollowed
[Guest]: it out by quote unquote these silly pampering acts which were meaningless through which you
[Guest]: kind of created a coterie of this uh of male clergy privileged sections who became the
[Guest]: spokespersons of the community with whereas the community had moved way ahead
[Guest]: disgusted with that same leadership you know so you don't want to navigate or negotiate with
[Guest]: a modern looking uh you know um you know a man or woman uh from from who may be a
[Guest]: believing muslim maybe an agnostic but who definitely represents his or her community
[Guest]: because he or she is going to question the way you look at her community that don't stereotype me
[Guest]: i have been working i'm working that i'm a busty level worker i'm a self-made person
[Guest]: uh please don't patronize me it was a relationship of patronage not a relationship of rights and i
[Guest]: keep saying i used to say this because i have a certain equation with the muslim community because
[Guest]: my work i used to say this in-house all the time that why do you have this relationship of
[Guest]: patronage with the opposition party that time it was a ruling party demand it as your right as a
[Guest]: citizen of this country as a citizen of this country you need to be protected you need to
[Guest]: have economic livelihoods you you shouldn't and you should demand that every time wise you're
[Guest]: taking four generations back every time there's a riot so much of your property is destroyed
[Guest]: and you know this is under which regimes before before before 2002 you know so uh so it was both
[Guest]: things happening i just wanted to table that equally well come this very good question you
[Guest]: raised minuscule sections of the muslim community were raising this question of codification of the
[Guest]: sharia law from the beginning and uh i don't think the hindu community should feel resentful about it
[Guest]: they should be happy that at least that happened to them but they should certainly ask the question
[Guest]: like indian all indians should as to why there was not a similar codification of the sharia
[Guest]: bill i don't think uniform civil code is the way to go but the codification which will then ensure
[Guest]: certain gender just provisions emerging and then if you want a certain gender just code or the
[Guest]: special marriages act to become a more gender just and representative diverse thing certainly do that
[Guest]: i think that's another very valid proposition when you've had voices within the muslim community
[Guest]: raise this question again and again and again that please codify these three practices like
[Guest]: like again i'll repeat polygamy triple talaq halala and others they don't exist in other muslim
[Guest]: countries so why do they exist in india and yet this uh so that's the other thing that happened
[Guest]: with the shah banu thing which is i think important to table here is that the the the creature called
[Guest]: the muslim person of war that had been dead for about 80 90 years didn't exist in terms of the
[Guest]: political consciousness of this country or community or the muslim community was resurrected
[Guest]: by none other than rajiv kanthi because of that stupid exercise of getting that special law passed
[Guest]: now never mind the fact that you know that law itself that muslim women divorce protection act
[Guest]: has also been used by muslim women to get their rights because that's what people will do but
[Guest]: but the impulse to pass that law to take out a question section of the community away from the
[Guest]: purview of normal uh criminal law is it was what uh alienated large sections of the majority
[Guest]: population so i think that is something we need to recognize that how do we view different
[Guest]: communities when we govern what do we mean by secularization of society uh you know what do
[Guest]: we mean by secularization of state so congress also precurs the uh majoritarianism in the state
[Guest]: if you look at 1984 i mean if you look at mrs gandhi's statement that she made from jammu i
[Guest]: remember i think 1980 i was horrified horrified when i read that when she said and that's why
[Guest]: balasaheb devaraj of the rss had said that she's the tiger and we need to support her is that uh
[Guest]: she was she said i'm faced with khalistan on one side and i'm faced with uh separatism in kashmir
[Guest]: so i'm appealing to hindu india to vote for me you know so it's not as if the majoritarianism
[Guest]: had not started creeping into the state as well earlier the the state in the latter years of the
[Guest]: rule of the earlier opposition largely the congress but even even the coalitions did
[Guest]: ignore the whole question of the communalization of the police force which was like a hugely
[Guest]: a problematic issue which had thrown itself up i did a lot of investigative work on this
[Guest]: when i started covering communal violence and found that and so so all of this built up into
[Guest]: what we are seeing today you know so state agencies police governance in governance agencies
[Guest]: it's one thing to be secular neutral uh you know that you don't really bring a live secularism
[Guest]: but another thing to allow the induction of those kind of people who actually have an ideology which
[Guest]: is hardcore rss and there's a big difference it happened started happening so you know veer
[Amit Varma]: sanghvi in his recent memoir and in an episode he did with me speaks about exactly what you said how
[Amit Varma]: the 1984 congress vote was really a expression of the hindu vote and at that point the bjp realizes
[Amit Varma]: that hey we are losing the battle that used to belong to us you know let this you know they
[Amit Varma]: formed the bjp saying we'll do gandhi and socialism but they said forget that you know
[Amit Varma]: let's chase the vote and then you have that sort of that competitive race to the bottom as it were
[Amit Varma]: and this is sort of one trend that is playing itself out that makes it seem inevitable i also
[Amit Varma]: did an episode with vinay sitapati on sort of the history of the bjp before modi and sha and
[Amit Varma]: one of the interesting points he made there was that liberalization in 1991 while it led to all
[Amit Varma]: the prosperity and all the great things that happened one of the sort of side effects was
[Amit Varma]: that it brought into being a new middle class which just happened to be conservative or bigoted
[Amit Varma]: or whatever term you want to use for it and that played into the political arena and thinking of
[Amit Varma]: it that way it almost seems as if what we have seen in our politics in terms of the general direction
[Amit Varma]: was sort of inevitable events might be circumstantial and uh you know different
[Amit Varma]: things happen at different points like you said the godhra incident was just a pretext for what
[Amit Varma]: was already planned and we'll talk about that in detail as well but the general direction was
[Amit Varma]: always this the general drift was always this is that a take that you'd agree with or do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that it's too much based on hindsight that there are different directions we could have taken
[Guest]: that it need not have gone this way even that question is would be hindsight you know even
[Guest]: that answering that question itself would be hindsight so i just want to mention that it's
[Guest]: very easy to uh you know take it either way that it's very easy to adopt this position which you
[Guest]: already mentioned that it was going to go this way anyway uh then the question i asked myself
[Guest]: that is that a kind of a defeatist position that you're trying to say that because you
[Guest]: maybe we didn't do enough or maybe you didn't anticipate deeply enough and is that why we
[Guest]: are now today coming up with that that that analysis or then i will ask myself this question
[Guest]: but then if not that then what what could have been done differently would be the next question
[Guest]: and i think one immediate thing which definitely occurs to me is federalism i'm coming back to
[Guest]: something which is i think uh decentralized politics and federalism so federalism is not
[Guest]: just in terms of what how you disempower the states financially and economically and culturally
[Guest]: but i think also how political parties that is a dominant political party again you come back to
[Guest]: congress but i think all of them dealt with regional leaders dealt with diverse diversity
[Guest]: in leadership and all of that and i think that that decentralization uh diversification in politics
[Guest]: enabling leaderships to come up from subaltern communities and castes
[Guest]: and federalism i think is something we should have definitely done differently
[Guest]: because i think this as the belief kind of took hold with the same middle class you're talking
[Guest]: about that you know only a top heavy centralized one man messiah kind of a thing which has never
[Guest]: been the solution anywhere in the world in any case it's just been one of those
[Guest]: things that catch catch people's fancy but just end up in pure disaster so actually the best
[Guest]: governments have always been coalition and low-key and non-confrontationist but but somehow the
[Guest]: that's not what the hindi film is about and that's not what the that's not what the narrative is
[Guest]: about so i think this is definitely one thing we need to be looking at very seriously today
[Guest]: when we talk about other things we need to be talking about uh you know um the the federal
[Guest]: aspects of the constitution even if it is not federal enough what changes need to be made and
[Guest]: how india can possibly be governed uh peacefully and successfully or non-confrontationally and
[Guest]: possible by respecting maximum amount of layered diversity meaning diversity not just at one level
[Guest]: or whatever but right from the bottom up to the top because i think it is this diversity itself
[Guest]: and only that will eventually be a proper bulwark against this i agree with your solutions about
[Amit Varma]: federalism and decentralization but that also begs the question because if you just go back
[Amit Varma]: to the circumstances like you mentioned the constitution was framed where when the country
[Amit Varma]: was basically falling apart you know gyan prakash had a book where he sort of made the point that
[Amit Varma]: the emergency that indira gandhi called in 75 was actually constitutional and the reason it
[Amit Varma]: was constitutional was that so much power was centralized in the constitution by the framers
[Amit Varma]: and it was rational for them to do so because they looked around and hey the country is falling
[Amit Varma]: apart so would federalism even have been uh possible and then if you just look at how power
[Amit Varma]: uh you know plays in uh to character you know i had an episode with rahul varma and i discussed
[Amit Varma]: this with others as well where we speak about the decline of the congress party in the real moment
[Amit Varma]: where the decline gathers space is indira gandhi where she starts changing chief ministers at will
[Amit Varma]: and she's just completely centralizing all power within the congress so it is kind of
[Amit Varma]: run from delhi and that's when the party kind of decays and that's why you see what is happening
[Amit Varma]: today and you know the roots are back there so in a vacuum yeah sure you know you need more
[Amit Varma]: federalism need more decentralization and i'm sure we can add things to the list but realistically
[Amit Varma]: you know but i mean i i don't want to seem sort of defeatist and you know it was always
[Amit Varma]: meant to be this way but you know it's hard for me to pick out a point where it could have gone
[Amit Varma]: in in in a different direction but it's not a question and i'm not even arguing with you i'm
[Guest]: just kind of uh i mean let me just come to the last three years or four years in maharashtra
[Guest]: okay and we had this experiment it's like a crazy experiment maharashtra vikasagadi
[Guest]: and i don't think i could have believed anybody could have believed that such an experiment could
[Guest]: have been even possible or whether it would succeed and i think it reasonably succeeded
[Guest]: and i think the biggest test for it was covid the biggest test for it was a pandemic lockdown
[Guest]: period if you look at the manner in which the lockdown was handled from delhi and from the
[Guest]: thali punching and the lockdown and then that led to the millions of people i mean after partition
[Guest]: it was the most miserable migration we saw of our migrant workers on the roads and how many
[Guest]: of them lost their lives and all of that that was central government were inflicted and then we saw
[Guest]: what happened in maharashtra i'm not saying other states didn't do it but i'm saying the manner in
[Guest]: which it was handled in maharashtra far from perfect but far from bad the manner in which
[Guest]: a man who became chief minister completely untested we know the background we know everything
[Guest]: but the manner in which he sort of uh commandeered those uh one and a half years i think got respect
[Guest]: from many of my friends in sitting in delhi uh who were even appalled by the way kaj kejwal handled
[Guest]: the delta the second round where there was death and devastation in delhi and uttar pradesh and
[Guest]: gujarat and others so my point is uh i think over intellectualizing uh and dismissing issues like
[Guest]: federalism and diversity like you've done it won't help you'll need to concretize uh what i'm trying
[Guest]: to say with with moments when this could have happened or can happen in future uh and can it
[Guest]: happen realistically is the question we need to deal with okay that can this kind of diversification
[Guest]: and uh decentralization actually happen or is it too far gone a story now and i think that's
[Guest]: the challenge we will have to face and it's going to happen i believe because of the manner in which
[Guest]: economics is going the manner in which the workforce pressures are going the manner in
[Guest]: which agricultural pressures are going and the cultural and religious issues we are facing it
[Guest]: i think that that is going to be the only solution people will finally find or we'll split up you
[Guest]: know into god knows how many fragments because this kind of thing is unfeasible not feasible
[Guest]: to continue for a long time so either you're going to be able to figure out and this is exactly what
[Guest]: Kamal Nath is talking about every single day which is that we sitting in Bombay and Delhi
[Guest]: don't read about what's happening in the south because the south has not mattered to our
[Guest]: consciousness we are so north oriented you know we are so Delhi uh Sarkar oriented i mean this
[Guest]: is a conversation that is happening every day when they're saying that we'll call you not union
[Guest]: government with central government it's very very fundamental issues that are being raised
[Guest]: and and those are successful strong governments that have raised them where there's a strong
[Guest]: social justice component where there's also atrocities on Dalits and all that we know that
[Guest]: so my point is it's happening at a real level also it's Maharashtra was an experiment Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu is something else Kerala is something else so let's just see i mean let's just see i mean
[Guest]: today what's happening in say Telangana and what TRS is trying to do what just came out in the
[Guest]: papers this morning in terms of how it's i mean we know that they're trying to buy off these MLAs
[Guest]: and MPs all the time how far is that buying out going to go because the politics that we are
[Guest]: seeing which this regime has perpetrated Modi and Shah as you put it is not a genuine centralization
[Guest]: of politics it is also huge amount of money throwing around after demonetization we everybody
[Guest]: knows how this money got into their hands yet there's no institution that is prepared to
[Guest]: question it yet so all of this is up in the air and out in the open it's known and yet it's unknown
[Guest]: it's known and yet it's untackled you know so i think it's therefore not a fair level level playing
[Guest]: field at all by any means whether it's the election commission you're talking about the courts that
[Guest]: are willing to question etc so my point is we have to see how all this plays out is it going to be
[Guest]: getting much much worse before it never gets better or is it going to get slightly better
[Guest]: so there's going to be spaces created where there'll be more resistance that is the question
[Amit Varma]: no i take back my words you're right these are signs of hope especially you know udav thackeray's
[Amit Varma]: leadership and i'll have a question about that which just kind of struck me and as much as that
[Amit Varma]: is a sign of hope you know earlier we were talking about our oppositional politics is letting us down
[Amit Varma]: but i think if there's one thing that gave me joy and hope about this country it was the mass
[Guest]: protests at the time of ca no and also when bilkis's remission happened yeah i was in jail
[Guest]: but i was unbelievable that i saw the level of protests that happened and the kind of people
[Guest]: were horrified at the act brazen act of not just the gujarat government but also now we know the
[Guest]: center yeah despite the fact that the presiding judge mr salvi and the cbi also opposed the
[Guest]: remission i think both things you know sorry to interrupt the ca and this for me was a sign of
[Guest]: hope that and even a man like udav thackeray mentions the bilkis banu remission you know
[Guest]: i mean and uh one particular example i would like to give about udav ji because i think it's very
[Guest]: important an interesting experiment happened the first round in 2020 i'm talking about when the
[Guest]: lockdown was declared and all that there's a large education campus in punah happened to be owned by
[Guest]: a muslim i won't get into names and all there's a mosque there the person who was this thing he
[Guest]: offered it to the local administration for quarantine and he that became was like a spiral
[Guest]: effect a lot of mosques in western maharashtra and maharashtra gave up because large areas they said
[Guest]: we can allow the mosque to be used for quarantine spaces for covid udav ji actually did a video or
[Guest]: this thing somewhere thanking the muslim community saying that this is very valuable space because
[Guest]: they were running out of space they were appealing for schools and colleges now you know these are
[Guest]: very small things but in a very battered hateful public atmosphere it's just a recognition of
[Guest]: different people's contribution and different communities contributions and it means a lot
[Guest]: and i don't think it means that you're compromising on your being a believing
[Guest]: hindu or whatever it is it is genuine indian lived secularism that's what he did so there
[Guest]: are examples like that you are going to come up with which which are happening around us
[Guest]: few and far between maybe not enough but i think if those kind of things can be strengthened because
[Guest]: and that they can be strengthened only by a kind of self-confident politician who believes that
[Guest]: his or her supporter is not going to go away because he or she says that small things can be
[Amit Varma]: big things and this reminds me of an incident i'll share with you for those of my listeners
[Amit Varma]: also who haven't heard my episode with mukulika banerjee but i was very moved by this story
[Amit Varma]: mukulika has written this great book on the khudai khidmatgar called the pathan unarmed
[Amit Varma]: and to do research for the book she spent she took 10 years to write it but she spent a few
[Amit Varma]: months in the northwest frontier province in pakistan going from village to village looking
[Amit Varma]: for for past members of the khudai khidmatgar who would all be in their 70s 80s or whatever
[Amit Varma]: and she noticed that actually as she goes through these villages you know in those areas beef is
[Amit Varma]: very cheap and chicken is expensive so every house keeps just one chicken in case a special guest
[Amit Varma]: comes and wherever she was going she was being given that one chicken which is so expensive for
[Amit Varma]: them and she felt so bad that she started eating beef and then she came back to india and she told
[Amit Varma]: her mother who was a devout hindu about what she'd done and her mother thought for some time
[Guest]: and that's such a beautiful story which speaks to exactly you will find most people most indians
[Guest]: even today under modisha's india reacting like that they're horrified by the lynchings they
[Guest]: horrified by the thing i don't believe our people are i mean it's a wretched country to be in just
[Guest]: now because of what the silence i see around that there's not enough protest but then i tell myself
[Guest]: there are reasons for it and the people are not willing to take risks etc but i think ordinary
[Guest]: people do react to these things but the fact that the media doesn't let those stories come through
[Guest]: the fact that and therefore i feel the hugest and biggest abdication is by the media today and
[Guest]: they're they're going to be historically culpable for the personal human cost that is being paid by
[Guest]: young lives who are incarcerated by this regime and and the lives have been brutally taken away
[Guest]: by this regime it's the media house responsible collectively because if they let the stories of
[Guest]: hope and the stories of struggle get across like they used to at one stage then i think others get
[Guest]: emboldened no you come out of your kind of isolated cocoon you feel like this is happening
[Guest]: people are fighting something is happening so we can also do something small
[Amit Varma]: you don't need to necessarily do big things it plays to what the sociologist timur quran calls
[Amit Varma]: preference falsification one way in which i kind of explain what has happened over the last few
[Amit Varma]: years is that there were so many closeted bigots among us who kept their bigotry to themselves but
[Amit Varma]: social media emboldened them to speak out because they saw so many others like them
[Amit Varma]: and you had what quran would call a preference cascade and the modi wave and so on but what you
[Amit Varma]: are saying is that it can also go the other way that a lot of us in these heated environments
[Amit Varma]: are sort of not speaking against it but you know if enough people start doing it and just when
[Amit Varma]: covid struck it seemed as if people were doing that young people were out on the streets waving
[Guest]: the preamble and it seemed like 300 or 400 meetings i attended on cnrc because of assam
[Guest]: experience across india i was just doing trainings because people knew we were working in assam so
[Guest]: they kept calling us how do we cope tomorrow if it comes and it's going to come i'm telling your
[Guest]: viewers now it'll come next year they'll bring in npr nrc because they have nothing else they have
[Guest]: nothing else but negativity and confusion to offer our people they want to put they want us to trace
[Guest]: our documents around so that we are not in a position to struggle and challenge them so i
[Guest]: think we need to prepare ourselves for this kind of vicious onslaught because one of the other
[Guest]: things i said and this is i was privileged enough to deliver the kanabiran memorial lecture for pocl
[Guest]: within a year of this regime coming in and that was 2016-17 and things are so much worse now
[Guest]: when i said they've opened up so many fronts
[Guest]: why this government or regime is worse than any other is because they've opened up multiple fronts
[Guest]: economic, adivasi, dalit, minority, human rights, unemployment i mean on every and they've opened
[Guest]: up so many front and if i sit and calculate there may be 20-25 000 of us all over the country
[Guest]: who are fighting this it's not enough they have to be many many more but there are those doing
[Guest]: fantastic things but you need to somehow create an atmosphere with which this will spiral
[Guest]: and that fear of reprisal will go because that is what is making people quiet
[Amit Varma]: so before we go in for a break one sort of final question sparked by what you said about uddhav
[Amit Varma]: and this is just me thinking aloud in my grand tradition of randomly thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: which is one thing that i really loved about uddhav was his style of speaking to the people
[Amit Varma]: where it's like he's speaking to a friend that you know angela merkel has the same thing for example
[Amit Varma]: where you're not declaiming in front of an audience grandly but it's it's personal it's intimate it's
[Amit Varma]: almost like a friend is speaking to you or you know your elder brother is speaking to you it's
[Amit Varma]: it's that kind of a connection and that leads me to thinking about a you mentioned earlier that
[Amit Varma]: across the world people seem to like strongman leaders so every once in a while that's the
[Amit Varma]: narrative that's a narrative no there's actually an evolutionary explanation for it that all our
[Amit Varma]: instincts evolved in prehistoric times we lived in small tribes uh you know it's a dog eat dog
[Amit Varma]: world you want the leader of your tribe to be the strongest bigger biggest mofo there is so it's
[Amit Varma]: perhaps you're instinctively drawn to leaders who appear to be strong yes but i don't think that's
[Amit Varma]: yeah but and i'll now come to what appears to be a completely unrelated subject that one movement
[Amit Varma]: i've seen in the creator economy is that whereas the superstars of yesterday and perhaps all the
[Amit Varma]: way till recently were people who were larger than life right so you have your amitabh bachchan and
[Amit Varma]: you have your uh shahrukh khan even and you build temples to them and they're just larger than life
[Amit Varma]: and today in the creator economy the people who do really well are people who are authentic to
[Amit Varma]: themselves who build an intimate connection you feel like they are your friend and i wonder if a
[Amit Varma]: similar sort of connect can be made in politics as well where it's not just the larger than life
[Amit Varma]: you know modiji declaiming in you know his shudh hindi or whatever but just someone like udhav
[Amit Varma]: sitting talking one-on-one almost as if he's a guest on a podcast kind of uh chatting with you
[Amit Varma]: and i wonder if a leader like that can also then get a mass following and and kind of get through
[Amit Varma]: i mean what what do you think because you've uh you've written a lot about the shiv sena in your
[Amit Varma]: book as well neither of us is too fond of udhav's dad for example and i'd done an episode on
[Amit Varma]: maharashtra politics with sujata anandan where she did kind of see it coming she saw udhav as
[Amit Varma]: someone who is you know not cut in the same mold what is your sense that is this that when we talk
[Amit Varma]: about a new politics do we need to look at a new politics not just in terms of issues but also in
[Amit Varma]: terms of manner of communicating and reaching out because as an activist you are communicating and
[Amit Varma]: reaching out all the time what do the people want what do you know see we need to understand that
[Guest]: this narrative that we are constantly being fed and i'm sure some of it is true because it's like
[Guest]: the eternal stereotype a stereotype is powerful because at least 15 of it is true otherwise it
[Guest]: can't work okay therefore this narrative of you know the messiah or the big man or the big woman
[Guest]: or the strong strong is good for you is the a narrative but i would put it just as a narrative
[Guest]: i'd say it's a descriptive narrative not a normative that's what i'm trying to say and i was
[Guest]: just going to the next point i want to make is just six yesterday i read somewhere i pinned it
[Guest]: i've not yet read the whole thing that 66 percent of people indians don't know i have not heard of
[Guest]: monkey bar i mean just i've flipped flitted through that i've not read the study yet now if this is
[Guest]: even a good sample and a study it tells you it's an answer to your question that if 66 percent of
[Guest]: indian don't know what a megalomaniac is saying and for which he thinks it's you know it's the
[Guest]: biggest and the most important moment of his prime ministerial life every month then it tells you
[Guest]: something okay now coming back to udhav udhav ji you know very interesting thing is if you look a
[Guest]: little history and trajectory like you're interested in doing go to his grandfather
[Guest]: a social reform interrogating caste took the rss head on you know and in fact i think recently the
[Guest]: republication of his collected works has happened in marathi at least i'm hoping they'll come in
[Guest]: english sometime so i think you know there is there's a multifaceted tradition behind
[Amit Varma]: behind what we are talking about families containment yeah and what i think was the
[Guest]: strength of udhav was what you're saying that not just as a friend he was calm in in in today
[Guest]: i think people would like to listen to words of calm wisdom rather than shrill uh shaking which
[Guest]: see i remember once being on a show by somebody like even rajdeep has become like that now barka
[Guest]: because towards the 2000 towards 2014 as the as the trajectory of modi build up even the anchor
[Guest]: sort of fell in line you know and everyone was shrieking on television i realized i could see
[Guest]: i remember when one what was that thing she used to do that one of the talk shows she used to do
[Guest]: we the people we the people it was chandranitra and other and one day i told her i said barka
[Guest]: asked me the same question on a lower tone and i whispered she said what do you mean i said the
[Guest]: moment you start i'll also shout louder that's what you want because see that's the idea that
[Guest]: if i suppose we were not having this conversation at this and suppose you were kind of very
[Guest]: excitably saying something my instinct would be to also respond with the same hyperbole okay whereas
[Guest]: in a nice calm conversation it's possible to talk laugh in a very low tone and and say the
[Guest]: same things and better things maybe you know so i think this is what udav has that has that ability
[Guest]: stalin has that also in tamilnadu they're not shrieking and shouting they're making
[Guest]: solid points i mean stalin may be more political or whatever but and during covid what was very
[Guest]: interesting about udavji was that he was constantly consultative and i think that
[Guest]: consultative thing appeals to maharashtrians because it's a rational streak we were faced
[Guest]: with a beast an unknown beast this virus it was freaking us all out we didn't know what to do
[Guest]: with it was scary it was worrying all over so he was saying okay i'm talking to doctors i'm talking
[Guest]: to my bureaucrats i'm talking to my team we are trying our best and i think that is the best thing
[Guest]: you should be able to do in a crisis this is what the prime minister should have been doing talking
[Guest]: to various chief ministers and their bureaucracy rather than trying to be play god you know because
[Guest]: even god did not know what covid was you know so i think this is the difference and yes i really
[Guest]: believe that the way forward for india and the world is going to be collective leadership
[Guest]: collective solutions collective faces yes attractive young diverse gender diverse ethnic
[Guest]: diverse all all those boxes have to be ticked but you don't need to have that one strong his him or
[Guest]: her it can be a collective voice and it can be collective solutions also because i think the
[Guest]: kind of problems you're facing i mean we're not even looking at climate change but when i just
[Guest]: think about the kind of what children will have to face in 2050 which is a hot world which is like
[Guest]: an oven i mean we are not even looking at all of that because we are so caught up in today's
[Guest]: we're not looking at the fact that we might have water wars tomorrow in bombay because we just won't
[Guest]: have enough water so you know what are the things we are going to be thinking of short term middle
[Guest]: term and long term what are the issues we need to focus so we preserve ourselves in some dignity as
[Guest]: a human race and not completely exterminate exterminate ourselves with the way we are going
[Amit Varma]: at the moment yeah i mean your thought of modiji is not god is interesting because if he was god
[Amit Varma]: he wouldn't exist because god doesn't exist but i i you you've made it that's a really profound
[Amit Varma]: point and how a leader can set the tone the same way a television anchor camera podcast i've
[Guest]: experienced it because i used to be called for tv all the time fortunately now i'm ostracized so i'm
[Guest]: very lucky because now after 2014 they don't want to call me which is just as well but i realized
[Guest]: that it was very possible for me to remain calm when they shriek i would just tell them please
[Guest]: lower your tone i'll answer the question and that would actually unsettle them a little bit
[Guest]: i said because you know you're doing it so that you want me to scream and this is not a cup panchayat
[Guest]: it is a television debate or discussion their views need to be exchanged so we don't have to
[Amit Varma]: be shouting at each other on this note i will gently suggest without shouting or shrieking
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break and we'll continue this on the other side
[Amit Varma]: long before i was a podcaster i was a writer in fact chances are that many of you first heard of
[Amit Varma]: me because of my blog india uncut which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular
[Amit Varma]: at the time i loved the freedom the form gave me and i feel i was shaped by it in many ways
[Amit Varma]: i exercised my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because i wrote about many different things well that phase in my life ended for good
[Amit Varma]: different things well that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive
[Amit Varma]: it only now i'm doing it through a newsletter i have started the india uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com where i will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy i'll write about
[Amit Varma]: some of the themes i cover in this podcast and about much else so please do head on over to
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign up each new installment that i
[Amit Varma]: write will land up in your email inbox you don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now
[Amit Varma]: for free the india uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com thank you
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm chatting with ishtar setalwad and you know we
[Amit Varma]: spoke for two hours and we didn't really even get much into your life or your childhood or whatever
[Amit Varma]: so i want to kind of get into the chronology of that a little bit and i'm fascinated and very
[Amit Varma]: jealous that you've kind of lived in the same house more or less all your life yeah so lucky
[Guest]: except for maybe four years when javed and i moved out and started living together in government
[Guest]: quarters in antofill you were finishing your question or no no yeah i mean uh tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about that because uh you know i've had guests on the show and sometimes we will discuss what is
[Amit Varma]: our sense of home and how rooted are we and various of my guests like me will sometimes lament that
[Amit Varma]: that sense of home is not really so strong one of my guests max rodenbeck spoke about he grew up in
[Amit Varma]: cairo and he spoke about how to him home means cairo but it is not the cairo of today that no
[Amit Varma]: longer exists you know it's it's it's it's a cairo of memory and it strikes me that even though you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of lived in the same place all your life it's not been the same place all your life you know it
[Amit Varma]: just kept changing and since you know you live in juhu i live in andheri uh you know buildings like
[Amit Varma]: the one i'm in must seem like monstrosities and unimaginable so tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: growing up was like in the 60s and uh you know what was life like actually it was just it was
[Guest]: just so much fun because it was like a it was like a different bombay different mumbai different
[Guest]: bombay uh i i mean i've always loved bombay and i think i continue to love it though it has changed
[Guest]: so much and so and and it has always been juhu as home for me except except four years like i said
[Guest]: when java then i moved out and started living together much the chagrin of my parents but
[Guest]: anyway so that place where we live now is is off the beach on the beach and very lucky place to be
[Guest]: because particularly now with all the like you said buildings coming up i won't call it a
[Guest]: monstrosity but you know large buildings everywhere construction everywhere actually more than the
[Guest]: buildings i feel the fact that they don't they don't allow trees around them as is mandatory
[Guest]: required you know you're 14 inch spaces you should have trees that's another story but growing up was
[Guest]: like uh so next to the bungalow where we live in now which was built in 1964 there's an older
[Guest]: structure which is next door which is an old old bungalow and that is where my grandfather motilal
[Guest]: moved in 1933 when he broke away from the family home at napiency road which is off settlevard lane
[Guest]: over there it was named after jim and lal and he was a great man for the outdoors he liked he liked
[Guest]: open spaces green spaces and all of that so he moved out with his two children atul usha was my
[Guest]: aunt and atul and his wife and i remember that uh we growing up with these stories of his moving out
[Guest]: and the older house and the new house as all families have and we still have a lovely black
[Guest]: and white photograph of the napiency road home which is known as jim and lal's residence
[Guest]: and when he moved here and my mother had this i saw it after my father passed the old
[Guest]: land agreement on where my grandfather bought this property there's his signature and there's
[Guest]: grd tatas so that was all tata land you know so and he didn't buy just this plot where we built
[Guest]: the home in 64 the old bungalow he bought right he bought about like 20 bungalows worth of the
[Guest]: whole stretch right from that where naval vakil's bungalow now is where now jai roo auntie lives
[Guest]: right up to asha parikh's bungalow because his vision was that you know i'll move there and then
[Guest]: i'll we'll sub sell these plots to friends and family and this this be one large community of
[Guest]: all of us living together and it worked like that for about 25 30 years for him because i mean 40
[Guest]: years 50 years for him because 1933 we are talking about so for instance um my father and i were born
[Guest]: in that 1933 that older bungalow and then this this place was vacant land and then there was my
[Guest]: there was my one aunt another aunt then there was india bombay's very famous dentist bg bg kher's
[Guest]: brother he had one bungalow then there was gajjar dr gajjar who was bombay's primer pathologist who
[Guest]: was a friend of my grandfather so it was like that was that sort of a world where my grandfather did
[Guest]: all that and then of course things started changing in the 70s when people sold off and
[Guest]: buildings started coming up and everything but what i remembered is that there never was a there
[Guest]: was never a compound wall so it was like a huge stretch of bungalows bungalows bungalow and gorgeous
[Guest]: gardens and we used to just run through all of them as kids because it was like no question of
[Guest]: security no question of uh walls or you know traversing gates or whatever so it was a very
[Guest]: very lucky existence and the beach i mean for me the sea and the beach was everything and i remember
[Guest]: right up to when i was 22 23 swimming off juhu beach and swimming at midnight by moonlight as
[Guest]: well which much to the horror of my sister she'd be really worried because my parents wouldn't know
[Guest]: i had sneaker so it was a safe beach it was a safe place it was a clean beach so it was quite quite
[Guest]: quite nice and the sound of the sea has always meant huge amounts to me the sound of water in
[Guest]: the sea but the sea and i think waves sort of always the gentle or the more ferocious waves
[Guest]: always sort of reflected the mood i was in whether it was upset angry or very calm and i don't know
[Guest]: why that has always always been a huge thing for me and my mother was a very avid gardener
[Guest]: and painted planted huge number of trees and she was into you know biodiversity and
[Guest]: indigenous trees and all of that and she was quite a bird watcher as well so a lot of that
[Guest]: sort of came through i never had enough time for this till now now last 10 12 years with all my
[Guest]: hectic stuff i love to cram in four five hours a week in the garden doing planting ensuring that i
[Guest]: pot report do nursery stuff give plants to a lot of friends in because i think the more
[Guest]: greenery you can spread the better so there was all of that books were a big thing i mean my
[Guest]: father my father actually my grandfather had a library not so my grandfather my father was a
[Guest]: crazy reader i mean he was one of the fastest readers i know i think my son after that and i
[Guest]: am also quite a fast reader but my son reads very well so he would just devour and a lot of it was
[Guest]: non-fiction so he had a fun he has a fantastic library so we had a benefit of that and also
[Guest]: benefit of a father and mother who said that don't bother about your textbooks this is what you need
[Guest]: to know you need to get into books marks are not important but the book knowledge from books is so
[Guest]: i think that is also so precious and so important it was also lucky because one didn't have to get
[Guest]: into the rat race of high marks and jobs but so it was obviously privilege but i think privilege
[Guest]: used nicely you know rather than in a money also i remember something very intrinsic past of me is
[Guest]: being very very my mother teaching us to be very frugal i mean she used to be very strict about
[Guest]: money very strict so we never had pocket money in school ever everything you needed you asked for
[Guest]: and then it was within limits you got it but only after 11 11th and 12th standard college we started
[Guest]: getting pocket money and always public transport function within your even your films and your
[Guest]: books have to be savings from your pocket money so i think these things are very important markers
[Guest]: about what you become how you live how you relate to people i mean yeah money was there is there but
[Guest]: it's also somebody something you respect you don't you're not crass about it you don't there's a
[Guest]: humility that come i have this story which i always tell people and sometimes javed throws it
[Guest]: back at me when i'm careless dada used to come we used to he used to be in delhi most of the time
[Guest]: so the months he spent in juhu or the months we he had another lovely home in uti uttakamal the
[Guest]: months we'd spend with him there in in whether it's here or we went to delhi to one of the lovely
[Guest]: government bungalows or into saint patrick's in uti uh you know he'd take these morning and evening
[Guest]: walks so i'd feel very important walking next to him so as a toddler i'd be walking aping him
[Guest]: putting my hand at the back and walking and stuff and on the in the juhu bungalow it would be in the
[Guest]: front lawn he'd go walking up and down so i remember once i think maybe i was in standard
[Guest]: four or something and it was a sunset time walk and at moment i saw him go out from his bedroom
[Guest]: i charged from mine to join him and he of course smiled and i started walking together and then i
[Guest]: suddenly saw him turn back towards the house and go into my bedroom because i left the light on
[Guest]: and he didn't yell he didn't shout but he just went and put off the light and came out
[Guest]: and he said you know that so that that's those are kind of lessons you
[Guest]: that stay with you that no wastage of electricity no wasted of money no wasted of resources
[Guest]: you know you you you live you you have money you live in a fancy place but you
[Guest]: you must remain grounded and respectful of people and what they are and
[Guest]: and domestic help was always family their families were family i think all these things really are
[Guest]: very very crucial to you and for me they were very precious so there was that and of course
[Guest]: there was a constant engagement with current affairs news law politics a constant so newspapers
[Guest]: reading the newspapers listening to like you were saying you know earlier that we were so starved of
[Guest]: entertainment so listening to all india radio listening to whatever forms of news you go at
[Guest]: was extremely important and then discussing that with my father at the dining and for me that that
[Guest]: dining table for was an arena for discussion debate and argument and i think that it's it was
[Guest]: it's it was such a precious site because my father would encourage both our sisters to argue
[Guest]: and to contest what he said and i think that was the biggest lesson i learned in terms of parenting
[Guest]: or in terms of teaching even which i started doing later is that you are not threatened by discussion
[Guest]: or debate or argument that you need to encourage it at every step because that shows growth that
[Guest]: shows evolution and and regardless of where that argument took us even if it was most bizarre
[Guest]: things we said but he would encourage us to argue so the days when they would go out for dinner with
[Guest]: friends or whatever it is i remember listening to the news bbc all india radio writing down all the
[Guest]: important news points that i had to discuss with him the next day and i would leave the note for
[Guest]: him i said this is what needs to be discussed tomorrow so i think that sort of discursive
[Guest]: upbringing you know which is very adult even though you are growing minds you're treated as an adult
[Guest]: you're given that respect your mind is given i think is is so important and then there are so
[Guest]: many things you remember because the asian games took place when i was in college elphinstone
[Guest]: college and that was a big thing because it was the first time india was hosting something
[Guest]: internationally like that and very exciting for young people so we booked our tickets to delhi
[Guest]: we said we'll go to the stadiums and watch and everything and all of that and we were there for
[Guest]: a good week or 10 days watching all of this and then one weekend we took off that's a good friend
[Guest]: of mine my sister and i we took off to jaipur just touristy kind of a thing to go and see the pink
[Guest]: city when we were coming back and this was the early 80s 81 i think coming back to delhi and
[Guest]: and we went by st bars the bus was stopped and
[Guest]: all the sardar boys were asked to get off and they were frisked and i remember getting so agitated
[Guest]: and upset by it so upset by it and i used to have this habit of constantly discussing everything
[Guest]: with my father everything including things that really angered me upset me and that time there
[Guest]: was only std phones not easy to call but i remember making sure that day i went to an std booth and
[Guest]: taking extra coins and i said what are they doing okay we might be faced with this problem of
[Guest]: khalistan or whatever but is this the way a state should deal with it if they want if there was a
[Guest]: fear for a stadium in delhi or some terror attack they should have searched all of us why are you
[Guest]: singling out one community the moment you do that you're going to alienate and anger that community
[Guest]: you know and i experienced the same thing in 1995 in charar sharif when charar shir was burned in 95
[Guest]: when i was going from uh shinagar to yusmark so this attitude of the state of you know singling
[Guest]: out had begun and i think this is what we were not able to see how to handle it and i was remember
[Guest]: remember feeling very disturbed by it anyway so these are things you think back on you know that
[Guest]: when you realize that an understanding was growing about some of these issues which you then engaged
[Guest]: in later family was very important to my father and mother both so family holidays were like a
[Guest]: huge thing he never ever did not take family holidays so a lot of it was with my grandfather
[Guest]: in delhi either as attorney general or then a member of parliament law commission and all but
[Guest]: also ooty so and in between we would go other places like we go to himachal or we go to kashmir
[Guest]: was very very important to us because my uh there's a family connection actually because
[Guest]: sheikh abdullah and my motilal were very close friends because my uh he was my grandfather had
[Guest]: was the indian council and representative of the united nations for the indian position on kashmir
[Guest]: and the fact that the sheikh had wanted to stay with india was a huge thing so they were very
[Guest]: good personal friends so i remember when we went to kashmir one of the one of our family holidays
[Guest]: uh he hosted us and it was such an awe-inspiring occasion that my father mother and the two of us
[Guest]: they hosted us for tea and there was a keva and there was a macaroons from kashmir that we ate
[Guest]: then the other time when we went to dalhousie and the dalai lama hosted us in a similar way because
[Guest]: just these were like private meetings but i mean they meant so much because you realize these were
[Guest]: really incredible people that you had a chance to meet simply because uh you had a chance to
[Guest]: you happen to belong to this family or whatever it is so these were some of the things that stayed
[Guest]: and there was one one little ditty that my sister and i would keep singing to ourselves which we
[Guest]: were taught i think by somebody in the family which is that atul motilal chimanlal harilal
[Guest]: brijrai harrai setelwal which would take all the of course it was very patriarchal because the
[Guest]: women were not counted but it just showed the long lineage of lawyers in the family so there
[Guest]: was all of that there was all of that and there was also the fact that my grandparents both sides
[Guest]: vegetarian uh gujaratis but my father beef eating alcohol consuming atheist a sense of rationality
[Guest]: that you make your choice so i used to ask him that how did you begin so it was because he went
[Guest]: for his llm in post-war britain so he stopped drinking stopped drinking sugar in his tea but
[Guest]: he started consuming beef so there were things like that which were very interesting and my mom
[Guest]: was never really a committed non-vegetarian but she would indulge my father and she would eat a
[Guest]: few things here and there she preferred vegetarian she preferred curries rather than meat as such
[Guest]: but there was all of that there was all of that and we were of course both my sisters are non-vegetarian
[Guest]: and there was no problem in the family on that my grandparents had no problem
[Guest]: there was also a huge respect for girls and women's status in the family and education so the
[Guest]: other thing i remember is my mother very strongly always saying that because she was also part of
[Guest]: the settlement family from another side so they were second cousins so that dowry is something
[Guest]: that was frowned upon during marriages so as a principle when there were marriages in the family
[Guest]: the girls would never be given a dowry and that was one of the thing precursors discussions that
[Guest]: you know and i think and that on the one hand and education and higher education for girls on the
[Guest]: other so i think all of these things stay with you and you realize the value of that has come to you
[Guest]: through a trajectory so there's it's a humbling experience also it's not something that you have
[Amit Varma]: done but it has been brought to you bunch of questions i want to ask taking off from this and
[Amit Varma]: i'll quote this para from your from the book about your dad but but first i'll just you know that's
[Amit Varma]: a lovely anecdote about how you were with your grandfather on the beach and suddenly he turns
[Amit Varma]: back because he's seen the light on in your room and you know the lesson there is not so much as
[Amit Varma]: so much as in wasting electricity though that's of course a lesson i think the lesson is to be mindful
[Amit Varma]: of the things around us and the things that we do with them and there is some of that that also
[Amit Varma]: comes across when you write about your dad in your book quote atul went to pupil's own a school
[Amit Varma]: started during the independence movement in a small abode in vilayparle which then moved to khar
[Amit Varma]: his friends from school included dilip purohit dilip dalal and hameer doshi they made up a jolly
[Amit Varma]: foursome who stayed close to the end my father had this unique and rare capacity to keep and stay in
[Amit Varma]: touch with all his friends even if their paths had diverged friday morning before court at the
[Amit Varma]: new coffee houses where they would often gather stop quote and and i found this worth remarking
[Amit Varma]: on because one you of course remembered those names and you know an indication of how special
[Amit Varma]: those people must have been to him and therefore by association to all of you and also just that
[Amit Varma]: sense of just as you know your grandfather is mindful that the light is on your father is
[Amit Varma]: mindful that i have to stay in touch with friends and i don't think that that's a quality that we
[Amit Varma]: can take for granted in modern times because more and more what we see is that we live more and more
[Amit Varma]: in the abstract worlds inside our smartphones you know you mentioned how in the dining table
[Amit Varma]: you would be encouraged to discuss stuff you're looking into each other's eyes and you're
[Amit Varma]: discussing things but the modern dining table is not that the modern dining table is yeah you might
[Amit Varma]: get four people together but they are looking into their phones or they are lost in their worlds and
[Amit Varma]: all of that and i mean we are only 12 years apart but i'd say that we are kind of more or less a
[Amit Varma]: large generation that has seen this transition from having to actually look into people's eyes
[Amit Varma]: and talk to them and having nothing to do if you're all alone there's no phone to look into
[Amit Varma]: to this new connected world where you are always engaged and you always you have this
[Amit Varma]: barrage of sensation and information just kind of coming at you and one thing that i keep reminding
[Amit Varma]: myself to do is to fight this that don't look into your phone when you know when you're with
[Amit Varma]: someone that make an effort to you know to be with your friends and all of that so do you have
[Amit Varma]: do you have any observations about this because one of the things that you've done through your
[Amit Varma]: activism is stayed in touch with people actual people you actually meet them actual conversations
[Amit Varma]: phone calls instead of whatsapp messages you know one very powerful part of your book and we'll come
[Amit Varma]: to that when we speak about 2002 is when as events unfolded you got call after call after call after
[Amit Varma]: call after call tell me a little bit about this you know this changing texture of life as it
[Amit Varma]: as it were and is it something that you've noticed that you feel you need to be on the
[Amit Varma]: watch out for or that you've seen affecting people around you because i would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that your kids would have had really different childhoods or growing up years and what someone
[Guest]: like you would have just in terms of experiences yes and no i think both you're right that you
[Guest]: know the sheer barrage of electronic information or electronic disinformation that is kind of
[Guest]: thrown at us is just it's just so it's from all over the place so it's like very difficult to
[Guest]: escape it but i think and you have to fight it you have to fight it for sure but i think
[Guest]: some of us our lives inevitably become the fight itself because in for instance
[Guest]: um there's no way i can do my work without actually engaging with actual people which
[Guest]: means lots and lots of very very good conversations also means fighting for that time to have those
[Guest]: conversations because sometimes the other work also takes over which is writing and communicating
[Guest]: and all of that and everything but i think the sheer activism the sheer expanse of this
[Guest]: activism means that you have to actually be engaging so you've already said that
[Guest]: but i think uh uh on a lighter note you know you just have to go to jail to realize
[Guest]: what happens when your phone is not there or you don't have a device because then the then it's
[Guest]: it's very and then it's back to your books i mean if you can manage to get the books it's only the
[Guest]: books and only the books but uh it's uh it's it's one great thing that happened because like you
[Guest]: yourself mentioned that except for four years i've been here is our kids also grew up here so i was
[Guest]: very very clear about this that there was no question of unregulated television or computer
[Guest]: even so they were just on the in the garden and on the beach most of the time so apart from school
[Guest]: which was bad enough for or good enough or whatever so it it was both being in the modern world and
[Guest]: yet being quite different because you had the lucky enough to have the outdoors so i think that
[Guest]: was a good balancing act that happened and then there was very kind of that you choose maybe one
[Guest]: or two programs for two hours a week and that's it nothing more but that also meant that we did
[Guest]: not have the television on and that was a very clear choice that we made though we were journalists
[Guest]: though we were activists stroke news persons we said whatever we do is after they sleep because
[Guest]: you can't have it running and then make that choice for them it has to be for all of us so
[Guest]: these are things that you need to be able to be clear clear about you know when you're parenting
[Guest]: as well but yes it is true that but fortunately i'm i'm quite a crazy i'm crazy person in the
[Guest]: sense i love cooking i love working with my hands i love craft i love gardening so if i don't do
[Guest]: that i'll go crazy so because of all of that then that is non-digital work that's non-phone work so
[Guest]: i can't do without all of that so and i am i've been lucky enough to have really really good
[Guest]: friends both from childhood and college and even through my activism where new friends have come
[Guest]: and they're as solid as the old ones and for me the greatest joy when i was in jail was receiving
[Guest]: 2700 postcards and letters which i was just i mean that just i think if there's one thing that kept
[Guest]: me going apart from visits from my family it was that and i think it was started as a political
[Guest]: act by the union the adivasi union i'm working with and the Janwadi Mahila Andolan which is the
[Guest]: women's wing of the cpim but then it took different form because i got so many personal letters
[Guest]: childhood friends from california who are now in california or a journalist from indian express
[Guest]: who wrote to me we worked together in 86 she walks to a card shop in birmingham buys the card
[Guest]: and posts it to the sabarmati women's jail you know i mean these are i mean i even now it's like
[Guest]: even now it's like one and a half months down that i'm out but i read and read them all the
[Guest]: time because i think when and i realize also the importance of the pen and the written word it's
[Guest]: not simply so i i've told myself that before the year is out i'm going to be replying to each one
[Guest]: of them so and that that's that's the task i've set myself because i think it's very important
[Guest]: to write letters back and not just email or whatsapp letters back and i think so these i
[Guest]: think because i think it's the handwriting the pen the paper the postcard the picture postcard
[Guest]: some of them that they sent and the words that they wrote i mean a close friend of mine jerry
[Guest]: pinto uh author he wrote one the first postcard which is a picture postcard which has a stamp of
[Guest]: jay prakash narayan and gandhi where he said they also spent a lot of time in jail and they're
[Guest]: thinking of you all the time and then there were 16 more which were poems which were unsigned
[Guest]: and i'm telling myself this is the same person and it was i didn't connect that this is jerry
[Guest]: he wrote poems from different people from palestinian poets to japanese sports all resistance
[Guest]: poetry and he wrote poem number one poem number two and poem number 16 and each one was a beautiful
[Guest]: poetry so i mean such lovely stuff people did you know when you were inside and i think these were
[Amit Varma]: the these were the things that really kept one going yeah i i think the only thing of value we
[Amit Varma]: collect are people and and this is such a beautiful story in your memoir you also speak about how
[Amit Varma]: you wrote letters and cards to your grandparents and you were encouraged to do so and you just
[Amit Varma]: mentioned writing again and something that i often think about is that the experience of writing
[Amit Varma]: letters and notes and messages has changed completely in the sense that today everything
[Amit Varma]: is a whatsapp message or a quick email or whatever it's very functional it's very brief
[Amit Varma]: whereas back in the day if he sat down to write to someone the act of writing itself was one it
[Amit Varma]: was communicating to the other person that i care about you i'm spending time on this
[Amit Varma]: and two it was an act of actually sitting down with yourself and examining the contents of your
[Amit Varma]: own mind it's a it's like a deliberate act of consideration it's not just that you hit compose
[Amit Varma]: on gmail and you say you know are you free at eight or whatever you know so and and you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that you'd like to do that and you mentioned what it meant for you to receive all of that and it's
[Amit Varma]: hard to sort of look back and kind of try to reconstruct this or whatever but how important
[Amit Varma]: do you feel things like that were in sort of shaping the way you related to people understanding
[Amit Varma]: yourself because every time you sit down to write something you you you get to know yourself a little
[Amit Varma]: bit a bit better in that act so how important was that kind of writing to you and do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: you lost like when now when you say that i like to do more of it is it because you stopped and
[Guest]: didn't do enough of it at some point and you feel that it would help you know i like to kind of make
[Guest]: two comparisons one to your earlier earlier question and this one that there's something
[Guest]: very very similar between the art of conversation and the art of letter writing and i was very lucky
[Guest]: to grow up with fine conversationalists so i mean whether it's my father or my grandfather
[Guest]: or another person who was very close to us H.M. Sirvai who was my father's senior and his son
[Guest]: Navrose Sirvai who continues to be a very dear friend there was joy in conversation so and that
[Guest]: conversation was personal political books poetry all of it intertwined so you realize that the time
[Guest]: you spend together with such people and my father spent a lot of time with his chambermates what's
[Guest]: lawyers call their chambermates so the parties for juniors were like big occasions for us because
[Guest]: not only would a lot of good food be planned but there would be lots of very lively conversation
[Guest]: so all the family friends we had all the chamber friends we had conversations were very important
[Guest]: and these were not conversations about Shadi and Bihar and Dowry but they were conversations about
[Guest]: life about what was happening around the emergency i mean the emergency was a huge thing
[Guest]: in our childhood you know i've written about it also but i mean for me it was a formative moment
[Guest]: when i'm in standard 10 in 77 when the elections are called and you have your parents both telling
[Guest]: you that listen your studies are not as important as your campaigning to get this government out
[Guest]: and you know in the pre-emergency in sorry in the pre-election period during the emergency
[Guest]: it was the homes of the Settlewad and the Chaglas and the Bhatkals in Bombay that all these meetings
[Guest]: would take place as to how the Janata party can come back and we need to get this government out
[Guest]: and etc so you know that that's a heavy dose of life and politicization that happens and then
[Guest]: you're out by public transport going to the Bhatkals place in Prabhadevi picking up posters
[Guest]: and plastering posters all over town and the matter of great pride that Bombay returns six
[Guest]: seats to the Janata party you know that so that sort of thing now these things don't happen just
[Guest]: like that they happen as a lot of conversation my first letter to the editor in the India Today
[Guest]: today was about Indira Gandhi's growing authoritarianism in 1978 and stuff like that
[Guest]: so you know all of this is so much part of the same thing that you're thinking you're conversing
[Guest]: you're learning through those conversations you have the benefit of some fine minds whom you're
[Guest]: conversing with all the time I mean I became a life member of the PUCL at 15 years because my
[Guest]: father paid the cheque for it and because he knew I was passionate about civil liberties so you know
[Guest]: all of this is getting imbibed at various levels and you're writing you're writing by hand so I
[Guest]: have my notes my essays my diary notes my letters to people and of course always encouraged by my
[Guest]: mother to write letters to grandparents and others so writing and communicating was always
[Guest]: important you know I mean the gift was not important but the letter was important and I was
[Guest]: writing even before the JLT I was writing a lot at least once or twice a year I'd write long
[Guest]: handwritten letters to close friends and family whom I felt like saying something to but after
[Guest]: this experience I want to do it much more because now I feel it has to be something that has to
[Guest]: become part of your life again it cannot be just something that you do to just say thank you for
[Guest]: those letters but to try and continue because it is an important exercise to get some nice handmade
[Guest]: paper from Chimanalaz to think of that letter pad write it out or recycle paper from an
[Guest]: organization that does recycling work and and write it because I think it's that communication
[Guest]: that receipt the receiving of that letter is so important and there's an old family friend of
[Guest]: ours who lives in San Francisco and she half her half her time is spent in and that family is also
[Guest]: in my very important part of my upbringing was my my mother's best school friend was Preeti Desai
[Guest]: and her three sisters Jyoti, Sita and Bindu and one brother were like family to her and my father
[Guest]: so we lots of holidays together and Bindu was Preeti and Bindu were like my political mentors
[Guest]: cuttings about Palestine and cuttings about resistance in South Latin America South America
[Guest]: all of that would come from the Guardian and the time that they would get and they would send it to
[Guest]: me to read these we've lost the others but Sita's are there but Bindu is so much part of my life
[Guest]: still she I got maybe five ten postcards from her in jail and she wrote to many of her academic and
[Guest]: doctor friends all over the world who then wrote to me when I was inside so you know there's so
[Guest]: much of this which is so important and continues to be important and why is it important only
[Guest]: because you feel important at that moment or you feel loved no I think through every postcard that
[Guest]: you get or letter that you get there is an idea there's a thought we are making a connection
[Guest]: so Dilip D'Souza when he writes to you will be writing about his visit to Portugal where he saw
[Guest]: that particular monument where he's which is writing about in the postcard that makes you
[Guest]: reflect on that then you think of Mario Miranda and his postcard you know there's so many things
[Guest]: that happen to you when you are reading and writing letters and the first letter I got in
[Guest]: jail was on 27th of July and that was in an envelope and it was from Son Badra it was from
[Guest]: the Adivasi union leaders women leaders Rajkumari and eight nine others had Angutha chapped it and
[Guest]: they had written out this letter and it the my fellow inmates in the barrack six were saying
[Guest]: what are all these letters why are you getting so many so then I would tell them about the women
[Guest]: who have written them who's Rajkumari and who's Sukalo so about for an hour that conversation
[Guest]: would take place till interest would wane I said no these are amazingly fantastic women you would
[Guest]: never meet such women in your life they live in this thing they're fighting for their land and
[Guest]: this thing writes they've been in jail twice I've been jailed only the first time so you know all
[Guest]: these comparisons analogies become extremely important I don't know what it meant to my
[Guest]: fellow inmates in barrack six but those conversations were very important to me to have
[Amit Varma]: with them. Wow that's so fascinating another sort of strand I want to kind of pick up on where you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned how it meant a lot to you to be living by the sea that you know you would have that sense
[Amit Varma]: of calm and all of that and you've also spoken about times where you know you just like to be
[Amit Varma]: yourself cooking or be with yourself doing something with your hands and one thing I
[Amit Varma]: wonder then is that how in one's life especially if someone is as engaged with the world as you
[Amit Varma]: are where you're always busy doing something organizing something speaking to people you know
[Amit Varma]: how do you manage to make space for that heraav in your life like sometimes you know you just want to
[Amit Varma]: sit back and sink into yourself and just find a moment of calm where your monkey mind is quiet
[Amit Varma]: so to say and at the same time you have so many things to do which are not unpleasant things
[Amit Varma]: to do you're passionate about it you wake up looking forward to doing them how have you kind
[Amit Varma]: of managed that because you know what someone like me will know of you from the outside is someone
[Amit Varma]: who's always involved and you know in your activism in your writing all of that but there is also a
[Amit Varma]: private self sometimes you just want to chill sometimes you just want to blank mind look how
[Amit Varma]: do you how do you manage these is it frustrating sometimes where there's just too much I never have
[Guest]: enough time in the day it's like horrible it's horrible I'm always fighting and I think I'm
[Guest]: driving everybody berserk with it because I'm trying to cram in maybe 40 things to do in a day
[Guest]: when I can only do 10 and it's like very very tough and ask my family they go berserk with me
[Guest]: because I make they they've seen this they've grown up with this so it must have been very
[Guest]: tough for them but yeah but I do zealously try to grab my private moments and then my family
[Guest]: tries to make me grab them too so that I try and get them but the holidays unfortunately have become
[Guest]: less than they ought to be the earlier we used to be very very this thing about having family
[Guest]: holidays three weeks a year three weeks in a year whatever but they have lessened a lot so
[Guest]: those are kind of big big sacrifices that one has had to make in the last seven eight nine years
[Guest]: hopefully that will change one keeps telling oneself that one needs to get that to change
[Guest]: because I don't think those three weeks are going to make a difference but but it's tough
[Guest]: so one just it's a tussle with oneself and as you kind of tell oneself about health also look after
[Guest]: yourself all those things are a battle and I think my family has paid a price for this frenetic level
[Guest]: of activity but I also feel that one is lucky to at least have the space and the place that one can
[Guest]: sit up and sit one never had the pressures of not having a home or having to pay a loan for the home
[Guest]: and I think I always recognize that that you know one is lucky activist in that sense and at least
[Guest]: this fallback cushion was there and maybe that's why one can do more or should do more so you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned how you know you decided you wanted to be a journalist when you read all the president's
[Amit Varma]: men and then you know you got into college and you threw yourself into student politics you
[Amit Varma]: protested free rise you were active in debating you were part of the film society all of that
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about what was your developing conception of yourself like when I think of myself
[Amit Varma]: in college I mean I would have no way of answering that question because everything was a confused
[Amit Varma]: hazy mess and you're just kind of going with the flow and whatever but in your case you know there
[Amit Varma]: seems to be more purpose to kind of what you're doing so what was that period like like were you
[Amit Varma]: so clear that you're going to be a journalist that this is just like a waiting period graduation
[Guest]: get the degree and then I think college for me was a flowering of my personality so I think that
[Guest]: journalism would have come later I was not looking at that state I was just enjoying every moment of
[Guest]: that thing of a kind of an educational space and institution where you were challenged by the
[Guest]: curriculum but not enough not to do lots of extracurricular stuff political engagement
[Guest]: because those are the times when campuses were political and I think that's one of the
[Guest]: linking up to your earlier question I think one of the reasons why you have this hopeless
[Guest]: depoliticization of the middle class is the this whole lindow committee business not having
[Guest]: elections in colleges and a completely depoliticization of the campus because I think
[Guest]: the only politics that happens in campuses is ultra-right politics and that's that's really sad
[Guest]: it's really really sad because there's a whole crop of us generations who got politicized on
[Guest]: campus because that's the age right you're out of school you're on your own your mind is growing
[Guest]: you're you're experimenting breaking away from what your family has stood for all of that is natural
[Guest]: and I think that was so important to me Elfie years Elphinstone years were like really important
[Guest]: for my formation in terms of what I became afterwards and what the these the the work
[Guest]: I did afterwards and my engagement with student politics issues I mean I mean we saw so many
[Guest]: lovely I mean I wish I could see the films that I saw there number of films I seen I can't see them
[Guest]: I don't have the time but we saw the most glorious films I mean apart from really good solid classics
[Guest]: and art films we saw I mean we saw three films a week in theaters you know and we bunk classes but
[Guest]: we were very active on the campus and we had very good professors so they knew their tutorials would
[Guest]: be submitted but not always we attended in class it was a fantastic atmosphere and I think we
[Guest]: really need to fight to get our campuses back to a space in a stage by which really good politics
[Guest]: can happen where the politics of equality and non-discrimination can be arenas in the campus
[Guest]: because where else can you learn this you know imagine I mean I'm coming out of Manikji Cooper
[Guest]: school and I'm going to Elphinstone and I'm engaging with the this whole question of feed
[Guest]: eyes and of course but I'm also telling the political organization that is talking about
[Guest]: feed eyes that please also raise the question of English language privilege because I'm already got
[Guest]: a 20 point handicap over somebody who studied in the non-English languages because I can I can sail
[Guest]: through my 11th and 12th without even opening my textbook if I'm not interested in getting 90 percent
[Guest]: I can get at least 50 60 70 percent because of the wretched English language privilege so let's also
[Guest]: battle for some sort of handicap marks for those persons who are not coming from you know so all
[Guest]: those issues get crystallized if you are able to articulate them in that kind of space how many
[Guest]: kids are given that in a commerce college today or in a science college today is there that kind
[Guest]: of articulation possible we saw it during CA and NRC and we know the potential is there I mean the
[Guest]: gathering we saw at August Kanti Maidan and then at Gateway for a deep politicized city like Bombay
[Guest]: was tremendous so the potential among young people is always there but I think we need to also revive
[Amit Varma]: politics on the campus to make this consistent. I guess you're saying this from you know an
[Amit Varma]: Elphinstone upbringing point of view but the counterpoint to this would be so many campuses
[Amit Varma]: in north and central India where you know politics just leads to violence and I guess the kind of
[Amit Varma]: politics you have also depends on the kind of society you're in and the kind of people that
[Guest]: there are you know those are not. See this is like a teacher telling me when we are doing teacher
[Guest]: training on Koj and we say that Koj's principle is pedagogy multi-dimensional and we must bring
[Guest]: conflictual issues into the classroom because to believe as an adult that the young mind has no
[Guest]: capacity to deal with conflict is as an ageist prejudice you know so this is one of the discussions
[Guest]: and trainings we have so many teachers say but you know you're talking about a very noisy classroom
[Guest]: so I said yeah but it's the right kind of noise it's the noise that means questioning so to answer
[Guest]: your question it's the kind of what kind of politics if you're talking about politics of the
[Guest]: mob then obviously what you're saying is true that's why I said that the only politics left on
[Guest]: the campus is right-wing politics but but if you're talking about the politics of organization
[Guest]: the politics of constitutionalism the question of make deepening the constitution deepening
[Guest]: democracy then this is the age to do it I mean you have to question your structures now and here
[Guest]: now and learn how to do it and experiment with how to do it you might make mistakes but that's
[Guest]: how you kind of get because I think to ensure that all our citizens forever remain politically
[Guest]: active the campus is very important and we have to have politically actives I'm not talking about
[Guest]: party politics but politically active citizenry is what strengthens democracy. So as we sort of
[Amit Varma]: segue from your college years to actually joining journalism let me also ask you a larger question
[Amit Varma]: about journalism which ties into your point about the importance of politics and political thinking
[Amit Varma]: I did a recent episode with the journalist Samarth Bansal you know and one of the questions that we
[Amit Varma]: sort of debated was just the meta question of what should a journalist report on because you know
[Amit Varma]: a journalist or a publication can really write about anything but you choose to write about
[Amit Varma]: some things and not about others and and that choice is aesthetic ethical political all of
[Amit Varma]: these things everything kind of comes into it and this is something that I think increasingly we
[Amit Varma]: need to think more about and you of course bemoaned and I share your lament of what is happening to
[Amit Varma]: the media today and the spaces that they've vacated but on this larger question what has
[Amit Varma]: been your evolving sense of it that if as a journalist you you have to think about what do
[Amit Varma]: I write about you know or if as an editor you're saying what are the stories we will publish today
[Amit Varma]: what will we put on page one and why you know what would your answer be today and how would
[Amit Varma]: it have evolved over time and I understand that obviously there are nuances here like what is your
[Amit Varma]: market or who are you speaking to and are you a tabloid or a broadsheet and obviously all of those
[Amit Varma]: nuances are there but in general I think that you know there are many of us who are searching
[Amit Varma]: for an answer to the question that goes beyond the functional one of what does the market want
[Amit Varma]: what will sell most copies you know what is trending on twitter you know so is there so
[Amit Varma]: how do you sort of look at this and how has your thinking on this evolved like where are you and
[Guest]: how did you get here see I think as a practicing journalist I need to explain to all of you
[Guest]: because you know you have probably not seen it from the inside I've been a practicing journalist
[Guest]: as well but never mind no but I just want to say that I think what is often forgotten is that you
[Guest]: know how is the whole concept of the fourth estate evolved I mean the fourth estate both internationally
[Guest]: and nationally within India and South Asia it's evolved as an entity or a thing which is
[Guest]: outside the state which is for which is by its very inherent nature anti-establishment and needs
[Guest]: to question structures of state and society so you need the independence you need autonomy etc
[Guest]: then as you evolve further and you get into a democratic setup you know you have this notion of
[Guest]: ensuring that the journalist or the media and we begin with print then we move to electronic
[Guest]: and digital should be equipped to question every governance structure that exists within that
[Guest]: democracy right now having said that step back for a minute and look at the way our national
[Guest]: movement and the freedom movement given what I was saying earlier where you have our best leaders
[Guest]: and even the using media for political mobilization so Gandhi as an editor Gandhi as a writer but
[Guest]: there's young India Harijan all the publications he edited Babasaheb Ambedkar edited like 15
[Guest]: Mukhnayak so many of them so many of them and each one of them had a different stage and evolution
[Guest]: so on the one hand I'm talking about the post independence what it ought to be or should be
[Guest]: what it has become we'll come to later and what it has meant in terms of political emancipation I
[Guest]: also flagged so it's very important to understand that the focus needs to always that of course the
[Guest]: editorial in terms of comment and comment writing or feature writing is important but I think the
[Guest]: journalists and publications and television channels and portals should never forget the
[Guest]: primary duty is to report now reportage means what reportage means understanding the structure
[Guest]: of society and state and having meticulous independent autonomous coverage of it okay
[Guest]: so in traditional terms what this meant for us when we began was beat reporting okay beat reporting
[Guest]: and what I would like to flag today is and I say this all the time because I take journalism
[Guest]: classes also is I really bemoan the complete obfuscation and eradication of beat reporting
[Guest]: today and I think this is very important so what am I saying here that you traditionally
[Guest]: and there were lacunas there also it was not perfect so we'll come to that in a minute
[Guest]: but what do I mean by I mean that how did we begin when we began as cub reporters or
[Guest]: trainee reporter you begin with the crime beat then you go to the corporation beat then you
[Guest]: I'm talking about cities then you go to the university beat then there's also health beat
[Guest]: and then there's also science beat for the experts and there's also legal beat law beat
[Guest]: court beat and there's of course the pinnacle which is everybody aspires to the political
[Guest]: mantra elevator the vedan sudha beat or the parliament beat so these were the traditional
[Guest]: I'm saying even then some of us were questioning like for instance we formed the women and media
[Guest]: committee which I write about then there were the labor writers and all even then we would
[Guest]: be moaning the fact that there was not enough attention paid to the labor beat workers issues
[Guest]: agricultural beat no attention at all even that time or very little maybe sporadically when there
[Guest]: was a drought but not as a big beat so farmers issues were not regularly covered agricultural
[Guest]: issues were there was no environment and climate change was never really an issue you know so even
[Guest]: then all this was being deepened and questioned but my point is that the beat journalism is gone
[Guest]: never mind that those that didn't exist or were eroded didn't didn't exist even then you know
[Guest]: so I think one of the things we really need to flag again today when we are looking at alternatives
[Guest]: and your own experience Amit with this entire podcast is actually a reflection of this that
[Guest]: to say that the market doesn't want it is bullshit you know I really whether it's with
[Guest]: Bollywood and the kind of films being trashed out or whether it is media I don't buy that
[Guest]: because who is deciding and who is giving we know the game of advertising what it was I mean it was
[Guest]: it was all a bubble you told yourself that this is what worked and you told yourself this was the
[Guest]: market wanted we know the world of TRPs where we know whether TRPs are represented or there
[Guest]: enough critical studies on that so I think let's come back to the fact that who is honest enough
[Guest]: to actually return to being a decent newspaper or a decent television channel or whatever and
[Guest]: who is willing to back that financially because the issue really is ownership money and all of
[Guest]: that which is what Vaya is trying to do that you know that funding by the viewer and all of that
[Guest]: all experiments in the making we don't know if they're going to succeed in the long term
[Guest]: scroll we just hope they do because if they don't then I think we are sunk because what little
[Guest]: options we have will go so I think I'll return that I think there's looking at this entire
[Guest]: business about number one reportage being as important as comment and when I mean by reportage
[Guest]: I'm not about just individual fragmented stories but through those individual stories you're
[Guest]: actually picking up trends you're picking up this thing and then you're doing an analysis
[Guest]: so from the reportage comes the knowledge of analysis not just sitting in a editor's chair
[Guest]: and doing the analysis with no knowledge of what's happening on the ground so today for instance and
[Guest]: this is what I found so tragic and many of us were still involved with the Bombay Union of
[Guest]: Journalists and the Delhi Union of Journalists is that you know 475 to 500 journalists lost their
[Guest]: lives during COVID and it's not a national story just as you had nurses and Anganmadi workers and
[Guest]: health workers who risked their lives so did journalists but it's not a story even for the
[Guest]: media why would it be for politicians so you know I think this is where the huge disconnect lies
[Guest]: that there are still journalists who want to do their job there's still journalists who are trying
[Guest]: to do their job there's still journalists who are actually sacrificing lives for the job but they
[Guest]: just don't get the visibility or the or the or the respect that they deserve maybe that was always
[Guest]: the case but it is far more acute today so I'm just saying that you know so crisis reporting
[Guest]: conflict reporting beat reporting and reporting before and no overemphasis on comment will itself
[Guest]: sort of bring down the hysteria levels and the hate levels because I think facts speak stronger
[Guest]: than words and many of the things that I'm talking about will actually the syncretism the
[Guest]: lived secularism of people will also get reflected in those stories you know which is why there's a
[Guest]: group of people in Tamil Nadu started this thing of My India or whatever they just report on all
[Guest]: the good news stories because that's the other thing many of us used to feel as reporters that
[Guest]: bad news is news but good news is no news you know so so much of this needs to be brought back
[Guest]: to the debate obviously forms will change because media has changed so I'm not saying we go back in
[Guest]: the in this go back four decades or three decades or two decades but we re-examine the proposition
[Guest]: that are we doing justice to reportage and if reportage has to be engaged in fairly today
[Guest]: of the various structures of governance how do we do it and if this is an age of shared news and
[Guest]: syndication and shared platforms can this be done collectively I think these are some of the
[Guest]: challenges that we need to do because the digital portals are trying it you know so you have a
[Guest]: mukhnayak you have a wire you have very very interesting experiments you have a that Khabar
[Guest]: Lahariya you have Gaon Ke Log many small and big interesting experiments taking place in the non
[Guest]: in the non-english arena as well but this is no match for the kind of bombardment and this thing
[Guest]: that we get from our electronic commercial channels I will I refuse to call them mainstream
[Guest]: anymore they are commercial they're pure commerce so how does one counter this that is a huge
[Guest]: challenge and of course some of our best journalistic minds are engaged in it but are they
[Amit Varma]: enough you know so you know a couple of profound points which I want to underscore and the first
[Amit Varma]: of them which might you know to the casual listener it might seem that hey what difference
[Amit Varma]: does it make if there aren't beat if there isn't beat journalism but it's incredibly important and
[Amit Varma]: I want to read out this passage from your book where you wrote about it where you wrote quote
[Amit Varma]: I believe I was among the last generation of reporters to benefit from training on the beat
[Amit Varma]: the loss of this structured framework has seminally reduced the quality and standards of
[Amit Varma]: the profession we honed our skills as observers and critics of the system by talking to people
[Amit Varma]: in the university in the municipal corporation the bmc beat in the mantra lay the seat of the
[Amit Varma]: state government or in the courts we listen to court proceedings and debates in the assembly
[Amit Varma]: to cover the courts to understand and report on the issues being contested meant plowing through
[Amit Varma]: court records petitions and affidavit annexures it was not only about flippant oral comments made
[Amit Varma]: in the courtroom each encounter allowed us to understand better the way these structures worked
[Amit Varma]: in our democracy mundane beat reporting allowed us to pour through the agenda of the standing
[Amit Varma]: committee meetings of the municipal council or to sense a pulse behind the assembly sessions
[Amit Varma]: our exclusives our front pages had to be built on long hours of hectic consultations learning
[Amit Varma]: and questioning stop quote and and the importance of this is that there is a deep engagement like
[Amit Varma]: what I see happened like one of the things that has gone wrong with media today in addition to
[Amit Varma]: many others but one of the things is that too many journalists today are generalists
[Amit Varma]: right the new publications don't have budgets so you no longer have beats with dedicated reporters
[Amit Varma]: one day you are reporting on bmc next day you're reporting from the hospital you're taking quotes
[Amit Varma]: from people without getting quotes from five other people you are not questioning anything
[Amit Varma]: it's it's become that kind of shallow reportage and the reason this matters is that I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you that one of the functions of the media is to speak truth to power and to me the key word there
[Amit Varma]: is truth right and how do you arrive at the truth you arrive at the truth by going as deep as
[Amit Varma]: possible by gathering as many dots as you can so you you can build a sufficiently high definition
[Amit Varma]: picture and again I say in truth to power the truth bit is important because it's also dangerous
[Amit Varma]: to go in the other direction and you know become sort of become oppositional for the sake of it and
[Amit Varma]: and we've seen that happening as well and the other profound point you made is about new ways of
[Amit Varma]: perhaps collective reporting arising and I've been thinking a lot about in the creator economy
[Amit Varma]: how new ways of expression are coming like I don't think there is any more any sense in any
[Amit Varma]: of us hoping that the big publications are mainstream publications will deliver they're
[Amit Varma]: not going to do that they have their pressures they have their incentives fine it is what it
[Amit Varma]: is but we have the tools of production in our hand you know you mentioned my podcast listen
[Amit Varma]: you know as an editor if I was I were to go to any mainstream house and say
[Amit Varma]: I would be laughed out of the room right but there are so many people like me who don't have to
[Amit Varma]: to conform to a particular conventional way of thinking who don't have to go through gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: and I think just as in the creator economy and really there's a thin line between creating and
[Amit Varma]: reporting and all of this that I do see hope coming there you know the likes of Khabar Lahariya for
[Guest]: example and so on absolutely that and I really feel that we should be talking on lines of this
[Guest]: collaboration and syndication of this work because and complementing and complementarity
[Guest]: because I think the time for these big mega be be everywhere stories are not going to work so
[Guest]: how can we share and it's happening people are doing it is people are doing it in a very
[Guest]: collaborative way it's just that it's a it's begun so I'm hoping that it'll get there at
[Guest]: some point you know and I feel I feel very very positive vibes from a very small section
[Guest]: of creators plus digital alternate portals who are really trying to do this and doing it
[Guest]: respecting each other's spaces respecting each other's values and not counting yourself in terms
[Guest]: of who's big and who's got the maximum money or whatever but in terms of who's a genuine journalist
[Guest]: and what is a journalist at the end of the day you know so I think it's it's very very important
[Guest]: to that and I think this reflection is very important and this articulation is very important
[Guest]: that we keep asking ourselves that are we doing enough reportage are we going out there to talk
[Guest]: to people and do it because that is that is what used to get us the anchor stories and the
[Guest]: testing stories and the analysis I mean 87 when 1987 when Express sent me to South Rajasthan
[Guest]: to cover the drought where there were this horrendous starvation deaths as well
[Guest]: starvation killings actually where a father actually you know sent his wife home and I mean
[Guest]: I'll never forget you know and but but that learning of that entire 10 days stays with you
[Guest]: for the for your life I mean even now how to report how to understand and how to understand
[Guest]: what you don't know so have that humility that you do not know this issue completely you're a
[Guest]: journalist so you're reporting it there's always more to know about it and you have to have the
[Guest]: humility to know that more you know so read read up as much as you can and have respect for that
[Guest]: expert on the ground or the expertise on the ground which is fighting it. So you joined
[Amit Varma]: Russi Karanja as a daily in 1983 and 1984 you speak about how covering the communal violence in
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai was a huge turning point like you've got a para and I won't even read it out about the
[Amit Varma]: violence you saw at cheetah camp in Govandi and it's just just horrendous I'd encourage
[Amit Varma]: everyone to read your book anyway what was that period like was it was covering that communal
[Amit Varma]: violence did it kind of change you how did you process all the things that you saw around you
[Amit Varma]: how did you kind of make sense of it tell me a little bit about that at that period.
[Guest]: I mentioned earlier if you remember that 86 was so important that whole 83 to 86 period is also
[Guest]: where the whole build-up was happening and I was covering Bombay and Javed was covering Bhivandi
[Guest]: because Bombay Bhivandi happened at the same time and you know you how to report it how to how to
[Guest]: put it down where the horror is not concealed from your reader but you don't become voyeuristic
[Guest]: also kind of created a whole churning and trauma even that you know you you don't want this to
[Guest]: remain at the level of just reportage that can you engage with it more and I think that is what led
[Guest]: up to eventually what we're going to start doing many many years later you know particularly 92 93
[Guest]: when activism also campaigning and activism also came into the play when our city burned and all
[Guest]: of that but I think the understanding and the engagement with this kind of targeted violence
[Guest]: and the horror of it you know unexpectedness of it it can just hit anybody anywhere and not anybody
[Guest]: anyway it's of course some people somewhere but you just read up much more about and I also I
[Guest]: have to say this that I learned so much from my mentors in journalism so I remember that for me
[Guest]: I was and that was another tradition we grew up with as journalists that you always had a mentor
[Guest]: so the best minds in Marathi journalism were my mentors I mentioned Jagan already there was D.K
[Guest]: Riker who was my chief reporter in Express there was there was so many many senior journalists that
[Guest]: one learned from and I particularly remember Madhu Shetty and S.B Kolpe because they were writing for
[Guest]: tinier publications but when 92 93 happened you haven't come to that yet but I just wanted to
[Guest]: mention that I started exploring this whole thing about you know this whole metaphor of who cast the
[Guest]: first stone you know that and then this kind of tendency to blame it on the angry Muslim who did
[Guest]: this here or did that here and then you start looking at that what happened just before that
[Guest]: and you realize there's hate speech and there's hate writing and that whole the temperature of
[Guest]: that demography whether it's a city or a region or a state is built up to that hate speech and hate
[Guest]: writing for weeks and months before the first stone is cast so and now you have what all
[Guest]: pervasive Facebook social media and all that so your geographic areas Lester showed us is like
[Guest]: just everywhere so how are you going to deal with it so the the I think I started
[Guest]: that engagement and then covering various bouts of violence after that November 84 when close
[Guest]: friends were involved in the anti-sick violence and reporting and relief work in Delhi then Meerut
[Guest]: Maliana Bhagalpur all happened 87-89 all of that became a kind of way to learn to read and learn
[Guest]: more about this this beast what is this beast why is it happening again and again why is it making
[Guest]: othering people amongst our own you know what I mean generation I mean we've already been through
[Guest]: partition and partition related is it because that catharsis was not allowed to happen is it because
[Guest]: we didn't discuss partition enough so all of those thoughts were forming and then you have 92 which
[Guest]: is like a big blast I mean it was like crazy so it your analytical capacities as a journalist are
[Guest]: growing side by side you're not thinking about just that reporting that incident but reporting
[Guest]: on the phenomenon of communal violence which is why we started conducting classes on the
[Guest]: historiography of communal violence at Xavier's Institute of Communications, Sophia and other
[Guest]: things and I think I'm thinking of now putting those online because I think they're very important
[Guest]: because institutes might feel too scared to touch the issue today but if they're online people will
[Guest]: will listen and there will be journalists who'll want to learn and I think it's important to put
[Guest]: it out there the kind of experience one has got so I remember this one conversation which is so
[Guest]: important to me it was sitting at the press club with Madhu and S.B. Kolpe and they saw that I was
[Guest]: I was frenetic after the 92-93 violence I was really both a journalist active doing whatever
[Guest]: I could really upset I'd also done the police violence messages exposed that which showed the
[Guest]: communal violence and you know Kolpe said just sit down and listen to me this is not entirely new
[Guest]: and that's what I remember that conversation I've gone back to free press I've still not
[Guest]: located that clipping but he went back to when he was a reporter in free press journal
[Guest]: and he covered the first first round of post-independence 1961 Jabalpur and what did
[Guest]: he tell me I've written about this also he told me that he was sent to cover it 10 days after
[Guest]: the violence had been raging and there'd been a set narrative nationally okay what was the
[Guest]: narrative that this Muslim BD worker had abducted this Hindu girl and therefore the communal violence
[Guest]: broken out he goes there he's sent by his editor that you go there something is wrong you go there
[Guest]: cover it properly he goes and he meets the superintendent of police he meets all the
[Guest]: like we all are supposed to do in the beat and he I remember him telling me he said you know
[Guest]: those days he was a Kashmiri Pandit he was Hindu and he told me he said listen all the damages
[Guest]: damages being being generated by this one rag which is published here which is RSS affiliate
[Guest]: which has started this narrative and all the publications are syndicating and picking up from
[Guest]: there there's no independent government yes there were issues between the families but it was a love
[Guest]: marriage but the class was different this guy was a working class he was a Hindu she was a
[Guest]: middle class girl he was a working class boy so obviously there was angst on both sides that you
[Guest]: know it's the love jihad of that time if you like but it was not conflictual in the sense that is
[Guest]: being made out and then it was it was a periphery that got into the act and the violence broke out
[Guest]: so he wrote those pieces two or three pieces for free press journal and he got a letter from Nehru
[Guest]: Pandit Nehru saying that you know thank you for doing a national service to the country by putting
[Guest]: right the narrative so you know that strengthened my conviction on that but journalists need to be
[Guest]: trained on how to cover communal violence just because you're a decent journalist doesn't mean
[Guest]: you'll get it right because it's a particular kind of beast there are forces and organizations at
[Guest]: work who are trying to generate a viciousness within us who are trying to generate hate within
[Guest]: us who are using hate speech as the currency as their currency so unless we no one are able to
[Guest]: catch that and the police often don't tell you about it or project it right or even prosecute it
[Guest]: because there's a there's a infiltration there so you have to be alive to all of this and there
[Guest]: will also minority communalism which is feeding into all of this so you know all these dimensions
[Guest]: unless we are aware of when we are entering the field you can't just cover it i mean i was lucky
[Guest]: because i was sensitized like this i was at that time and then i went my trajectory way i read more
[Guest]: i talked a lot of senior journalists read up all the commission reports uh all the judicial
[Guest]: commission reports on communal violence so that developed my analytical thinking but how many
[Amit Varma]: journalists will do that just like nehru wrote to your friend i hope one day modiji writes to you
[Amit Varma]: and says trista thank you for your service to the nation but i won't hold my breath waiting for that
[Amit Varma]: my next question is this that as things happen the more they happen the more they they get
[Amit Varma]: normalized the more there is a sense of numbing and i would imagine that uh you know if i had
[Amit Varma]: to cover incident of communal violence after violence after violence eventually you know
[Amit Varma]: it could bleed into one but what you have done in your writing and in fact you know just your
[Amit Varma]: description of one of the deaths at cheetah camp is an example of that is that you took that deeper
[Amit Varma]: look and humanize a person like you could easily say that uh you know a muslim boy was in a room
[Amit Varma]: and the police burst in and they took him out and they killed him but instead we know that he's a
[Amit Varma]: zari worker his name is abdullah he's writing a letter to a friend in kuwait about the birth of
[Amit Varma]: his child and then the police burst in and take him out and this just humanizes the whole thing
[Amit Varma]: immediately there is empathy and it's in fact really cinematic like if you had a web series
[Amit Varma]: on communal violence your opening scene could just be the letter being read out and whatever
[Amit Varma]: and then that sudden burst and the shock of the police and the violence and all of that
[Amit Varma]: this gaze did you work at developing it was it partly um a sort of a strategic thing that for
[Amit Varma]: my stories to be powerful this is what i have to do is it something that was taught to you
[Amit Varma]: or that you learned over time by yourself or was it always just natural to you tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about the craft of doing this kind of reporting to make it affect i don't think anything is just
[Guest]: entirely natural or is entirely taught right it's both correct so but if you're serious about what
[Guest]: you're doing and i think i was extremely serious and honest about reporting on communal violence
[Guest]: very honest i was always interrogating myself how do i put it down how do i communicate this
[Guest]: because you know you are writing on something which is potentially uh you're going to reach
[Guest]: people you enjoy a certain credibility then you it's all the more reason why you should be doing
[Guest]: it extremely carefully before i try and answer it further i want to give you one more example
[Guest]: of something like this in 1991 i was covering the rath yatra that rath yatra and uh that takes
[Guest]: place in jamalpur every year ahemdabad i was in business india and i was lucky in business india
[Guest]: allowed that space to explore the issue a little bit so it was not just like newspaper coverage
[Guest]: where you were covering on a day-to-day basis so it was a particularly uh uh brutal brutalizing
[Guest]: period that was happening all along because uh uh you had seen that whole development post 1986
[Guest]: and then of course it culminated in 2002 like i've written about but 1991 i actually traveled
[Guest]: by train from bombay to baroda surat then surat to baroda surat then finally ended up in himmat
[Guest]: nagar ahemdabad and i kept talking to people including businessmen who happened to be hindu
[Guest]: and one just was really appalled by the level of crass hate that was being openly spoken about
[Guest]: about the muslim minority but that apart that also reflected in my business story but
[Guest]: uh this particular incident i remember being really very very horrified by which is that
[Guest]: narangpura the posh area of ahemdabad uh one of the narratives of the vishwa hindu parishad at
[Guest]: that time was to distribute to journalists this map of ahemdabad which was painted
[Guest]: uh orange and green and i'm looking everywhere my people come a hoarder when i'm a real archivist
[Guest]: but i can't find it to show that you know anytime a muslim couple or a mixed marriage couple try to
[Guest]: move to a quote-unquote more elite area which by their definition was a hindu area
[Guest]: they would ensure through violence to push them back and there were many such incidents
[Guest]: one such was really brutal because this particular gentleman khan was his surname
[Guest]: living in this building second floor of a building in narangpura obviously had moved out from the
[Guest]: old city and in the height of the rathiata violence this couple of baksum gujrati
[Guest]: sari-clad women had pushed him to his death from the second floor back it was something that chilled
[Guest]: me because it was like so many things in that incident because it it was and how do you and how
[Guest]: do you ensure that a community remains ghettoized and the brutality of the violence the fact that
[Guest]: women are now engaging in communal violence as much as men which was not something i saw till 86
[Guest]: 87 in the country at all so you saw the handiwork of the vishwa hindu parishad and the sadhvi
[Guest]: then the sadhvi ritambaras as as icons you know it's working it's working in society so it was
[Guest]: horrific at so many levels so anyway i was in the process of writing this book so i was speaking in
[Guest]: nagpur and this is i think just a few months before the book came out in 2016 and there's a
[Guest]: public meeting in nagpur where i narrated this incident and i write about this also in the book
[Guest]: and after the meeting is over on the stage and all if you remember i see this young man sitting
[Guest]: there and he's shaken really shaken right and he said ma'am can i have a word with you and all i
[Guest]: said sure and he's he's a reporter for the times of india won't mention his name and he said i just
[Guest]: want to finish your story you mentioned that incident and i was just 12 or 13 or 14 when it
[Guest]: took place and it had chilled me and my family and i don't think you know this because you've
[Guest]: reported gujarat so closely i'm telling you so you can round off the story that that navratri
[Guest]: three months later those women were felicitated so you know you realize when you're writing coming
[Guest]: back to your earlier question that how do you write these stories that you have to write about
[Guest]: every nuance and every tone if you're honest about the story you have to also write the fact
[Guest]: that when you reach godhra the first time i reached godhra godhra was on 21st 22nd of
[Guest]: 21st 22nd of no no that was on 9th of march 21st 22nd was justice with justice varma
[Guest]: that visit was preceded by so many rumors as to why godhra had taken place
[Guest]: and you have to actually unravel those rumors so the rumor was one rumor for the majority
[Guest]: community one rumor for the minority community all of that because you know by then you had tv
[Guest]: internet emails had begun and all of that and one particular story i remember was about this
[Guest]: muslim girl at the godhra platform who was eve-teased by the karsevaks okay so that incident
[Guest]: happened it was bakrid that she was returned bakrid i was few days back so she was returning
[Guest]: to baroda with her mother and her younger sister and she was in attractive teenager and she was
[Guest]: actually eve-teased but what did the rumor among the muslim community say that she was pulled inside
[Guest]: one of the compartments and something so you know the story becomes another story you know so one
[Guest]: of the things i keep saying in my lectures to journalists and suggestions is never report
[Guest]: incidents of communal violence unless you have verified every incident even of the survivor or
[Guest]: the victim because because there is a tendency to of the of the untruth to also spiral into truth
[Guest]: you know because that's how the rumor functions and rumor is something you have to really guard
[Guest]: against as a journalist so long winded answer but to say that be honest be truthful cover every nuance
[Guest]: but never forget that the human victim needs to be central to the story
[Guest]: victim or survivor because you're not writing about numbers you're not writing about
[Guest]: numbers of death but you're writing about a human being a set of human beings who've lost their
[Guest]: dignity and life it is something you learn i don't think anything is just pure instinct or natural
[Guest]: but it's something i learned because i was serious about continuing to cover it though
[Guest]: it was a deep personal cost because it takes something out of you every time
[Amit Varma]: tell me about how that sort of journey happened from where you realized that activism was a part
[Amit Varma]: of your journalism just because of the nature of the stories you were doing and so on and so forth
[Guest]: where does the pen stop the full stop or does it stop with some little bit of justice being done
[Guest]: to the survivor should one facilitate that at all or should one just stop with the full stop and the
[Guest]: typewriter and walk off from there so there's another story if you'll allow me which is that
[Guest]: uh this is again 92 93 which is 7th i think is 7th 8th of december demolition was sunday 6
[Guest]: and i reached this khan abdul khan gaffar khan nagar and kurla and i reach around 9 10 in the
[Guest]: morning and this is one particular lane where there is this sole or lone muslim building
[Guest]: otherwise it's a maharashtrian locality and it's the survivors of muslim survivors of the
[Guest]: building who tell me the story so i don't think you can get it truer than that they tell me two
[Guest]: three things they also praise the acp of the locality for dispelling a rumor a real rumor
[Guest]: not a rumor fact when there was a pig was you know typical that you know what i can't also get
[Guest]: to is that i remember watching tamas i don't know if you watch tamas at all but reading tamas
[Guest]: watching tamas and then reading partition related sharath chandra stories and the cow carcass and
[Guest]: the pig carcass and the sindoor outside the mosque and the music outside the the stuff doesn't change
[Guest]: and yet we are falling prey and victim to this every time so i don't know how we are going to
[Guest]: ever deal with this and stop it does it mean people's education people's awareness or whatever
[Guest]: that's an aside so i reach there and this family starts telling me the story that we would not
[Guest]: have been alive today but for this one woman i said who's this one woman so she says she's about
[Guest]: 70 75 years old at the time she's the mother of the shiv sena shakha pramukh now you know it's it's
[Guest]: it's like unbelievable story material because she is this now nowari saree wearing maharashtrian
[Guest]: woman i go and meet her i take her photograph on my black and white camera and what has she done
[Guest]: her son bharat kavnekar drunk has taken this mob the night before 12 one o'clock
[Guest]: and is exhorting the mob to burn down the building attack and burn down the building
[Guest]: she gets to know she goes there this is all being told to me by the muslims who survived all this
[Guest]: she stands in front of them and here's her son who's like drunk and here's his mother
[Guest]: and here's his mother and she's saying that you will go there over my dead body
[Guest]: you got your talwar in your hand first you attack me and then you go
[Guest]: and then this face-off continues for a few minutes and then obviously slinks away ashamed
[Guest]: now i've got the story i did the story i talked to her because of these survivors i get the story
[Guest]: from them then i go and talk to her i take her photograph and i'm in business india which is a
[Guest]: fortnightly and i said this is not on i mean i can't i mean this story has to be told now when
[Guest]: the city is burning so it so happened that my husband is in sandhubs over so he's i said can
[Guest]: i go and meet your editor i talked to his editor and they put the story there with with a little
[Guest]: caption and nice small little text story but the photo is the most important and then she
[Guest]: gets the mayor's medal for bravery now should i have stopped at not doing that because i mean
[Guest]: for me that is important both as a journalist and as a citizen that this act of hers gets
[Guest]: recognized and important she becomes a symbol in those in those hatred in times so that's
[Guest]: these kind of things that started happening then 92 93 sainath nikhil wagle saajid rasheed javed
[Guest]: me our homes were like mini control rooms naresh fernandez daryl de monte because we were not just
[Guest]: covering riots there was no way we could be every part of bombay so we were also sharing credible
[Guest]: information so that we could report on other areas where we couldn't be but we were also
[Guest]: responding to despairing calls of victims now could we should we just put down the calls and
[Guest]: not call the cops after that those are the dilemmas we faced real life dilemmas that all of
[Guest]: us faced and all of us were doing this reporting also writing also and also making those calls
[Guest]: and that's when you found out that police is not responsive police is giving bizarre answers to the
[Guest]: victims so you know it was an evolution and presenting a need of the times that one needed
[Guest]: to do more than just put pen to paper or type out your story and give it in and part of the journalism
[Amit Varma]: is reporting in the moment that okay this happened this this lady in a sari went and
[Amit Varma]: stood in front of her son and you know that's a story but one of the things that you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that made you feel that you need to do more that you can't work within traditional media anymore
[Amit Varma]: is that traditional media was too focused on events but what built up to it what led to it
[Amit Varma]: what is going on in the background in a sense the scene in the unseen right that there is so much
[Amit Varma]: that is happening unseen and those layers are not being peeled off by journalists because those
[Amit Varma]: layers aren't sensational and you wanted to sort of then dig a little deeper into those layers so
[Amit Varma]: tell me about how you started coming to the sense that journalism is not it anymore and you need to
[Amit Varma]: go beyond and a supplementary question to that is that did the teaching that you were doing
[Amit Varma]: did it help you understand the subject better because if you're teaching it then you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: about it deeper you're going more into you know fundamental causes and so on and so forth so did
[Guest]: that help i just started teaching it later around around about maybe the early 2000s or late not
[Guest]: immediately after so sure that happened after much more experience came in dealing with it but uh
[Guest]: but uh but certainly before 2002 uh so the um but i think uh uh you know the the how do you put it
[Guest]: that uh i think we were also lucky enough to be part of a generation of journalists and writers or
[Guest]: that were by training in nature compelled to reflect on your own work okay you didn't just
[Guest]: do it and forget about it you looked at it you looked at your peers you looked at your
[Guest]: mentors and you know you talked about it that is it something you could have done better
[Guest]: is it some more elements you could have added so that was always a part of us
[Guest]: then as it you know then as 1984 moved to 92 93 and then like you yourself mentioned uh apart
[Guest]: from who cast the first stone this whole business of hate speech and hate writing then this business
[Guest]: about fallout build up and fallout that how long do you stay with the story that oh yeah
[Guest]: but you realize that under the law for seven years a missing person cannot get a check
[Guest]: so if your body of the body of the dead person has not been found and that that was is true of
[Guest]: targeted violence always that they're charred to nothingness you can't recognize them or the
[Guest]: body is not well then you can't claim the compensation or reparation for seven years
[Guest]: so this is the loss i mean then then you want to battle that for them you want to at least write
[Guest]: about it for them but then your publication starts telling you that you know now it's
[Guest]: an old story so you know many of these things started happening uh after gujar after 92 93
[Guest]: i mean it's not ironic 84 then 92 and then 2002 you know i mean and i've said that you know if
[Guest]: this culture of impunity an 83 nelly if this culture of all pervasive impunity which cuts
[Guest]: across parties where the binding factors of bureaucracy and the police that is there to
[Guest]: protect each other so that nobody gets booked did not exist and you would not have one massacre
[Guest]: leading to a worse massacre later you know it is that culture of impunity that was trying to
[Guest]: understand and grapple with so it's it's i think uh it was it was a challenge and that is what it
[Guest]: was a challenge to try and figure this out but how to write it and report it in a in a fair honest
[Guest]: emotive uh proper way and also to be able to not stop at just reporting it tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about you know that phrase you mentioned who casts the first stone because what we are currently
[Amit Varma]: sort of seeing all around us is basically narrative battles you know and and a of course
[Amit Varma]: that raises the question of uh you know where does journalism fit into this you're just one
[Amit Varma]: more narrative in a sea of narratives and you know but that can just lead us to uh unproductive
[Amit Varma]: laments but you've pointed out the skill with which all of this is uh done both in 92 93 where
[Amit Varma]: somehow these guys spread the bizarre narrative that the riots were a response to the blast you
[Amit Varma]: know well it was the other way around you know the blast happened in march 93 and there was more
[Guest]: that they were before that they said before they came to that bizarre proposition and remember
[Guest]: prakash javadekar was the lead one in that was that radha bhai chawl set it all off which was
[Guest]: radha bhai chawl incident was 4th and 5th january whereas you had all of december the city burning
[Guest]: and you had several things spiraling into everything including one muslim family burnt
[Guest]: alive in an red maruti car and top hill two days before radha bhai chawl if at all you need to
[Guest]: count this because i think beyond a point it doesn't matter which was first it was just a
[Guest]: phenomenon but you just want to turn every narrative on his end and it was a marty's
[Guest]: that were begun on 22nd december which were the single defining uh factor responsible for the
[Guest]: targeted violence of january you know so so many levels and of course these leaders crisscrossing
[Guest]: the country it was advani whether it was sadhvi ritambhara spewing venom of course you didn't
[Guest]: have social media but you had their video cassettes being distributed and it was so so so damaging
[Amit Varma]: would it have been worse if there was social media needless to say like before we talk about
[Amit Varma]: communalism combat tell me a little bit about javed so you know like you you guys were colleagues and
[Amit Varma]: you were covering sort of communal riots both of you he was in bhiwandi and you were in jugeshwari
[Guest]: and uh govandi in 84 so tell me a little bit about the partnership actually he is a graduate of iit
[Guest]: mumbai uh kind of metallurgy engineer who never did a day's engineering in his life he went straight
[Guest]: after graduate coming out of iit he was a gold medalist and all he went straight to working in
[Guest]: rural maharashtra joined an organization called freya and then isre so engaged with kind of
[Guest]: alternate development working in marathwada the 71 drought and uh uh you know then a library
[Guest]: movement in the state and all of that he entered journalism through a very unusual trajectory
[Guest]: which was not planned like like i wanted to become a journalist is through the textile
[Guest]: strike so he had started as a labor activist looking very closely at the whole reason of
[Guest]: labor unions and all that and started reporting on the textile strike for the blitz and the daily
[Guest]: and those reports had done very well and they were very very highly read and all that which is when
[Guest]: russi karanji offered him a job of special correspondent in the daily so that's when his
[Guest]: he sort of transitioned that was a couple of years before me so i joined in 83 and that's where we met
[Guest]: and uh we got to know each other almost immediately in 84 we covered the communal
[Guest]: violence together so i think it was a uh obviously it was a camaraderie and all that
[Guest]: also respect for the profession but also i think apart from a kind of perspective on labor and
[Guest]: human rights and generally i think this whole huge concern for the targeted and communal violence
[Guest]: was a was also was a shared kind of shared concern and i remember long conversations with javid
[Guest]: when he would come back from bivandi i would come back from covering bombay and you just needed to
[Guest]: talk it out because it was so brutal you couldn't sort of rest that night before you had long
[Guest]: conversations and sorted it out or nothing gets sorted but at least you share it and that was a
[Guest]: huge binding time very difficult painful time but a binding time and then i decided to quit the daily
[Guest]: within a year and few months because he got promoted to chief reporter and i just
[Guest]: did not want to ever have the uh anybody because he got personally involved also i didn't want
[Guest]: anybody to ever kind of and people will you know that's saying that i would get any
[Guest]: and i was very clear and that i was a decent journalist i didn't want to get that thing about
[Guest]: my having any favors because he was chief reporter so i had also begun doing a lot of legal reporting
[Guest]: and i was covering the antulay trial so by then i got an offer from express so i shifted the moment
[Guest]: i got it so it was i think a shared concern about where the country was going in terms of targeted
[Guest]: violence and what i found was a huge complementarity was that of course i was hugely concerned about
[Guest]: majoritarianism and the you know impending doom of hindutva which i saw but i realized that he
[Guest]: had this capacity i think because of his own biography because he grew up as a believing
[Guest]: muslim came to iit and iit sort of radicalized him completely so he became left and all of that
[Guest]: but i remember him telling me that when he was younger he was not only would recite the quran
[Guest]: but didn't want his mom to abandon the burqa and i can't imagine that to be the javed i know so
[Guest]: there was a huge change so he would always be talking about the absence of rationalism within
[Guest]: the muslim community and i would always need it needs to be talked about as much as majoritarian
[Guest]: need to talk and i thought that was a very interesting dialectic because i was of course
[Guest]: very concerned with the majoritarians of the community i was born into but he was always very
[Guest]: interrogative of the regress in which he saw and the obduracy so among the leadership even over
[Guest]: babri masjid of course everybody was extremely upset by the demolition but he he wrote this
[Guest]: piece i remember which i thought was a pretty pretty brave piece he wrote i think in sunday
[Guest]: observer which even siyasat carried translating it in urdu where he he was writing to the likes
[Guest]: of shahabuddin that don't make this into hindu muslim battle make it a battle of the battle
[Guest]: between the constitution and non-constitution and leave it to the majority to fight that battle
[Guest]: because if you make it into hindu muslim battle you're not winning given the trajectory of pakistan
[Guest]: and i remember not getting up slightly while writing that but realizing the sense of it
[Guest]: because you saw extremely hysterical outpourings coming from the minority side which was matched
[Guest]: then by the aggression from the majority side and the sufferer is always going to be the minority
[Guest]: in in this situation and he was able to see that dialectic you know which which is a huge learning
[Guest]: experience and continues to be because even he wrote this recent piece in the express on the
[Guest]: hijab thing and i don't agree with it entirely because i think the education of a muslim girl
[Guest]: is for me paramount even if she is forced by a pfi kind of outfit to wear the hijab but
[Guest]: i i realize the importance of a javed and writing what he's saying is that that you know outfits
[Guest]: like pfi cannot be given currency because they are just the flip side of the rss and they're
[Guest]: a whole he says for instance that a whole generation of extremely intelligent muslims
[Guest]: were lost to simi and now we are losing them to pfi you know and it's very sad that there's not a
[Guest]: another kind of politics that young muslims are going into so there's there's there's that
[Guest]: there's that engagement as a partnership which i think is always plot a complementarity to it
[Guest]: we've also had very strong arguments but i think it adds a lot to your own perspective also
[Guest]: so the so like he always says it's very important that this work is risky or she does the work she
[Guest]: does but it's very important that i continue to do this kind of interrogation so i think and
[Guest]: nature wise is much calmer than i am maybe but it's it's been a great partnership you know i've
[Amit Varma]: been reading some pieces by him while looking your work up and i found his writing really nuanced
[Amit Varma]: and even this piece that you mentioned on the bhabri and i was just thinking that in today's
[Amit Varma]: sort of social media polarized environment uh you know this is just going to get you slapped
[Amit Varma]: from both sides that do you feel that there is a degeneration of the discourse in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: there is sort of this incentive to preach to the choir and to kind of go more and more extreme on
[Amit Varma]: either side yeah and therefore there is no space in the middle there is no space for nuance you
[Amit Varma]: really have to be careful otherwise you're going to get mobbed from every end not only that there
[Guest]: is no respect for the need for dialogue are we going to stop talking to each other yeah i mean
[Guest]: am i going to believe that every single hindu or muslim even if he or she is different from what i
[Guest]: stand for that we can't have a conversation come to some meeting around and i think that is very
[Guest]: dangerous in this extreme polarized and i think that's what the ultra right wants they want the
[Guest]: reasonable voice to be completely submerged and to some extent they are succeeding but that's
[Guest]: that's the space we have to battle for we really have to battle hard for and i keep telling people
[Guest]: that listen i don't want to fight an election so i'm going to say this i'm going to say both
[Guest]: things and i don't want to come to fight an election i'm not coming for popular popular
[Guest]: brownie points so you may like what i'm saying you may not like what i'm saying
[Amit Varma]: but even the tough things need to be said so i'll pose to you a question i asked both hussein
[Amit Varma]: haidri and gazala wahab when they were on my show which is something i'm truly befuddled by which is
[Amit Varma]: that clearly what would work for the hindu right is that you provoke provoke provoke prod prod
[Amit Varma]: prod and some poor muslim guy somewhere can't take it anymore and lashes out and then you
[Amit Varma]: use the lashing out you spread it all over whatsapp and you use it as a pretext for whatever
[Amit Varma]: the same way gudra was a pretext for what happened and that scares the shit out of me because it
[Amit Varma]: almost seems inevitable because there is no end to provocations especially this year it seems like
[Amit Varma]: almost every week there are three or four things that we hear of in the news which are just
[Amit Varma]: you know it's targeted anti-muslim hatred and you just need one guy somewhere to snap and do
[Amit Varma]: something and yet uh you know the muslims of india and one shouldn't generalize but by and large
[Guest]: aren't snapping there's really i mean they have to live through the violence and hatred let's
[Guest]: remember that and they have already lived through it for decades the worst of course being uh post
[Guest]: 2014 to some extent but 2002 and then partition and all of that so 92 93 bombay so i mean it's
[Guest]: the community that is at the receiving end that realizes how it has to live and how it has to
[Guest]: navigate and i don't think we can ever have the gumption to speak for them i think it's really
[Guest]: wrong to do that but i've always said this that you know and this what i've said even to
[Guest]: law enforcement personnel police officers in better times when one would be called to
[Guest]: meetings with the uh at sardar patel police academy i would be called for lectures at one
[Guest]: point which of course won't happen now at least under this regime and i used to say that do you
[Guest]: realize that 99.9 percent of muslims today are still not getting provoked at all and that's a
[Guest]: huge huge uh tick mark you know and therefore it's so important i'm not saying there's no
[Guest]: radicalization happening i'm not saying there's no but that's a huge thing in favor of law and
[Guest]: for forget these are silver and civil rights activists it's a very important reality and
[Guest]: therefore what you need to do is trust building what you need to do is rights and a politics of
[Guest]: rights and not a political patronage and i think this is what the glimmer of hope that the ca anti
[Guest]: ca anti nrc movement gave us all particularly the initial phases when you saw the emergence of and
[Guest]: i think before lots of other people jumped in i don't want to get into that but when you saw
[Guest]: actually it became a articulation by amazingly articulate community women and youngsters
[Guest]: who was who was taking their voice as citizens you know that we are not going to get
[Guest]: dishoused from here we've bloody opted to stay here and we are indians and of course unfortunately
[Guest]: that whole narrative got turned around completely and brutalized with the covid and incarceration
[Guest]: and all of that i don't think that can entirely disappear though that spirit can't go of course
[Guest]: the cost has been hugely high paid by the community but i think it'll come back it'll
[Guest]: resurrect itself at some point uh and i think that the farmer's movement also got a lot of heart from
[Guest]: shinebug i don't think these things happen in isolation you know so i think the farmer's
[Guest]: movement coming up and it was also very syncretic and the fact that it did also articulate some of
[Guest]: the political issues that had preceded what had happened and all that but i think it's really not
[Guest]: a good space to be in what the indian muslim community is today being pushed into it's it's
[Guest]: it's it's very very sad it's disgusting as far as i'm concerned as a thinking indian that any
[Guest]: individual or community has to be compelled to live like that and pretend that everything is
[Guest]: all right i think that's the worst thing ever you know because things are not okay i mean you just
[Guest]: have to have a child going to school or you know you have to have somebody traveling by public
[Guest]: transport or you have to or you need to sit and listen to conversations on how with what fear
[Guest]: people travel by train or a cross-country train or whatever it is fearing that you know if they
[Guest]: just open their tiffin box they might be lynched you know so i think it's a terrible terrible
[Guest]: situation to live through we i mean i think the more of us who are born into the privileged
[Guest]: majority should not just acknowledge it but do little and big things to to to to
[Guest]: put this in our veins and to stop it and to protest it wherever we can
[Amit Varma]: tell me about criminalism combat now because you know you started in 93 and what was your sense of
[Amit Varma]: how this is going to evolve and was there a worry that how will you how will we make money how will
[Amit Varma]: we reach enough people will our work have an impact you know you must have started with all
[Amit Varma]: these worries obviously and immediately you you know had a bunch of impactful stories like a story
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned with the with the cover no riot can last for more than 24 hours unless the state wants
[Amit Varma]: it to continue which is a quote from a serving police officer which was picked up by you know
[Amit Varma]: 34 indian publications and a series of successes after that but what were the early days like
[Amit Varma]: because you know you you've made a move which is a move purely of conviction that this needs
[Amit Varma]: to be done but what were the uncertainties there and how did you approach it how did you sort of
[Amit Varma]: set that brief for yourself what are we going to do how are we going to do it it was not easy at
[Guest]: all it was very tough and it was like i don't think commercially it was quote unquote successful
[Guest]: or viable but and it 20 000 copies was the best selling number and by post and dispatches and
[Guest]: all of that but i think it's pretty good yeah but it had an influence which was very disproportionate
[Guest]: to the numbers you know because i mean and from day one we got this input that please ensure that
[Guest]: comes out in hindi we never could do that because i think that was a real need that it should that
[Guest]: kind of material should also be available in one of india's largest spoken languages but anyway
[Guest]: those are all the unfortunately we had english speaking and writing journalists so uh yeah we
[Guest]: had a string of quote-unquote journalistic successes it was recognized it was quoted in
[Guest]: fact just the other day lolly and ramu admiral ramdas and lolly um uh who run who they wrote
[Guest]: for six months we had to suspend publication then we got some friends did a show for us and
[Guest]: collected some money and started it and all so that the reopening issue i remember where
[Guest]: we went back to black and white and lots of stuff we had to do to cut corners so admiral ramdas and
[Guest]: lolly wrote wrote this autobiographical piece on when they saw delhi burn when he was then and he
[Guest]: was chief of indian navy as you know very powerful piece and just now she found a photograph of it
[Guest]: and she said tisa is there an archival copy i said you're talking to an archivist i'll send you a
[Guest]: copy but you know so you not only was it uh quote-unquote we have successes but we had the
[Guest]: kind of writing and people writing on it who were actually sharing very very priceless insights and
[Guest]: perspectives on targeted violence which i think was most precious about combat because whether
[Guest]: it's this or the earlier piece you're talking about when vijay vijay tendulkar wrote that piece
[Guest]: on muslims and i or suketu metha the writer shared us in a chapter of his book on partition where he
[Guest]: particularly shared that excerpt on that one punjab village where the sikh elder had indulged
[Guest]: in violence all of these actually cause a lot of introspection when you read them because it's not
[Guest]: about that one story or it's not about that one narrative but it feeds into this the effort that
[Guest]: combat was trying to make which is to understand and unravel the whys and and the wherefores of
[Guest]: this kind of violence that erupts with within us and the fallout of it you know and in fact i sort
[Guest]: of little flyer we used to put out when we were trying to get subscribers and supporters that you
[Guest]: know the riot in the mind festers for days and months and years before it spills onto blood on
[Guest]: the streets and we are trying to unravel that riot in the mind how does it get there who makes it
[Guest]: happen what makes it happen is it our childhood is it something we hear is it the shaka is it
[Guest]: something else you know so i think that exploration is what made it so special
[Amit Varma]: that essay you mentioned vijay tendulkar muslims and i i want to quote a little bit from it
[Guest]: as i get to my next question he had narrated it to javed i remember yeah this entire thing yeah
[Amit Varma]: a muslim meant someone with a beard the word also conjured up an unclean appearance uncouth behavior
[Amit Varma]: lack of education and culture a muslim was someone you stayed away from contact with them in any form
[Amit Varma]: was supposed to be dangerous i still remember a common expression very frequently heard in casual
[Amit Varma]: conversations among white-collared adults manu sahas ka musliman are you a human being or a
[Amit Varma]: muslim a stop quote and he also speaks about how this was once asked in a classroom and
[Amit Varma]: you know the student didn't mind it and what struck me as uh you know uh as a revelation the
[Amit Varma]: one thing i really didn't know about 2002 till i read your book is how many years it was in the
[Amit Varma]: making right and you had before 2002 happened in communalism combat you had five stories which were
[Amit Varma]: just on what is happening in gujarat and they have the headlines are in august 1998 is the first of
[Amit Varma]: those welcome to hindu rashtra then there's one on conversions then how textbooks teach prejudice
[Amit Varma]: face to face with fascism and split wide open in feb 2001 right and you've pointed out in such
[Amit Varma]: detail how the preparation for the riots you know right down to instruction manuals and so on was
[Amit Varma]: done in incredible detail for years and godhra was just a pretext you know any other sort of spark
[Amit Varma]: might well have worked and it wasn't really just modi modi had just kind of come that year this is
[Amit Varma]: our society this is a movement this is what was going on tell me a little bit about this and the
[Amit Varma]: reason i read that excerpt out also is it it's again the seen in the unseen right the muslim is
[Amit Varma]: unseen it's not concrete and it also speaks to the kind of ghettoization which you've described in
[Amit Varma]: great detail also which was there in uh gujarat especially and there is this very cities and
[Amit Varma]: borders cities are borders and there was this very moving quote by ahsan jafri where apparently he was
[Amit Varma]: in a riot in the late late 60s and then somebody said why are you still living here why don't you
[Amit Varma]: go and live where you'll be safe and he said no that's not my idea of india my idea of india is
[Amit Varma]: where i can live anywhere and feel safe and and so tragic given what happened rangbir bhai his
[Guest]: son tried to tell him just a year or two before the massacre that you the your your area your
[Guest]: trade union people have changed anyway and he was cauterized and killed but no so the the i mentioned
[Guest]: earlier in our conversation about 1991 and that khan sahib being pushed off the this thing so that
[Guest]: is also the build-up that is even before combat so so this is something i'd been following i'd been
[Guest]: following about gujarat and it just bother me because see at the end of the day my ancestors
[Guest]: are from there i'm a gujarati i i spent at least one or two holidays a year in ahmedabad because
[Guest]: my mother's maika my mother's mama was there we would go by gujarat mail we'd stay there
[Guest]: dhargarh old city the cloth market the bera famous mutton samosas which my father would bring they
[Guest]: were all part of one's upbringing so one knew ahmedabad and yet one was seeing this happening
[Guest]: later much later as a journalist and as an activist and as combat particularly and you saw
[Guest]: the lawyers associations getting bifurcated you saw teachers associations othering the muslims
[Guest]: i mentioned earlier to you that i mean i was appalled because i chief justice of india later
[Guest]: much later this is emma d one of our best chief justices hails from ahmedabad and a horrific
[Guest]: story i heard from senior lawyers at that time was that when he was first appointed
[Guest]: as chief justice and this i heard retrospectively he said several sessions lower courts went on
[Guest]: strike how could a muslim be a chief justice i mean this unheard of in any other part of india
[Guest]: at that time so what was it about gujarat that this was possible why was it happening
[Guest]: who was making it happen and i remember one of the in face to face with fascism i tried to deal
[Guest]: with some of this in earlier stories i tried to deal with it uh is is ask this question that
[Guest]: what was it about the gujarat's uh socio-political territory the political economy that allowed this
[Guest]: kind of othering to happen so one of course i said before that i think there was a particular vhp rss
[Guest]: project that discredited gandhi because gandhi was their biggest hurdle uh in terms of hindurashtra
[Guest]: you know so they they got him dead but they couldn't kill him so easily so so discredit him
[Guest]: in the line but that was a broad sweep statement what what next i think the fact that like i said
[Guest]: earlier that anti-caste movement social reform movements only went up to so much and didn't go
[Guest]: further in gurus not that there were no movements but they didn't go as radically deep as say they
[Guest]: went in maharashtra or karnataka or whatever i think that was important the other another factor
[Guest]: was that so for instance dalits they will call themselves harijan they won't call themselves
[Guest]: dalit you know and i think the trade unions only are mostly gandhian and socialist they're not
[Guest]: really left except in certain pockets so these are some of the patchy sort of insights one started
[Guest]: getting or started this thing and then girish bhai patel was a senior lawyer and activist
[Guest]: amazing personality i would have conversations with him and others and try and understand
[Guest]: what is it about gujarat and talk about the land reform movement never having gone below the patel
[Guest]: community patel is like the forward obc like the maratha years so you didn't really have land
[Guest]: getting into the hand of dalit farmers but then how many states has it gone even punjab you've
[Guest]: not had it gone to dalit farmers but still you don't have this level of deep-rooted communalization
[Guest]: so it's a complex story not yet figured it all out but one certainly was doing reportage and
[Guest]: investigations to warn people that something awful seemed to be nothing because there was
[Guest]: this galvanization of the mob our private armies weaponization all of that threshold distribution
[Guest]: so anytime there was this group of people fed on hatred and narratives that was available for
[Guest]: a project and you know unfortunately we saw that happen so i think that is why i did those stories
[Guest]: and it was no great satisfaction for me long before 2002 at every meeting one would address
[Guest]: to keep telling people that please pay attention to gujarat something terrible seems to be building
[Guest]: up there we are not paying enough attention and i think and we're very very sad to say that it
[Guest]: happened and you know the one thing i wanted to just mention because so many things i when i go
[Guest]: back to those cover stories i did the first one that you mentioned welcome to hindurashtra 1998
[Guest]: just the one after that we did one on the taliban in afghanistan which is what combat was about i'm
[Guest]: mentioning that was hell on earth and i did this telephonic std call interview with the revolutionary
[Guest]: association of afghan women and nobody in south asia at that time certainly not india today
[Guest]: our premiere magazine sunday magazine none of them were bothering to look at the you know
[Guest]: majoritarianism there or whatever it was only after bamiyan buddhas in 2001 that everybody started
[Guest]: waking up to what the taliban was but but we were trying to look at this everywhere
[Guest]: i'm trying to look at i mean i visited uh uh sri lanka in 1997 and wrote about the majority and
[Guest]: buddhist tendencies there so one was trying to understand this as a phenomenon not just to do
[Guest]: with the hindu religion but whenever the majority hindu religion gets means majority religion gets
[Guest]: close to state power what are the potential disasters that can happen so coming back to that
[Guest]: welcome to hindurashtra story you know it's not a coincidence that the two villages that
[Guest]: are mentioned there which is based on a pocl report at the time randikpur and sanjeevi
[Guest]: where for a three-month period after a brutal attack on the muslims living there they were
[Guest]: living outside their village for three months till somehow they crept that is exactly the area
[Guest]: around which bilkis was then in 2002 gang rape just outside randikpur so i mean what do these
[Guest]: connections mean what does this trajectory mean what do we ignore as society and state for the
[Guest]: build-up i mean i still remember doing this interview which is there in that issue of combat
[Guest]: i think it is the same issue welcome to hindurashtra where i interviewed uh then director
[Guest]: general of police cp singh and i asked him i said listen you know there's this constant rumors of
[Guest]: love jihad the love jihad was not a phrase till after the bamiyan buddhas but inter inter-community
[Guest]: marriages and all rumors around them that they are forced and they are this thing in fact babu
[Guest]: badrangi went into a whole racket with patel girls at that time uh and i said that how true is it
[Guest]: that these forced marriages are happening you know the gujarat government under keshubhai patel
[Guest]: had set up a cell in the police to investigate inter-community marriages a completely
[Guest]: unconstitutional act because once you're above 18 you can marry whom you want in this country but
[Guest]: yet the gujarat government had done this so it was the government that was functioning out of
[Guest]: the purview of the indian constitution for a long time i asked director general this question he
[Guest]: said all those stories are based on rumors and they're untrue we have investigated each one of
[Guest]: these cases and they're all voluntary marriages i've quoted him in combat on that so the rational
[Guest]: the rational debate is one thing the facts are something else but yet something completely
[Amit Varma]: different is happening on the ground and just to underscore the variety of stories you were
[Amit Varma]: covering you also did a cover story in september 2004 on bangladeshi hindus living with terror
[Amit Varma]: minorities in bangladesh you know you've mentioned javed's critique of the jamaat-e-islami
[Amit Varma]: uh where he wrote a piece called reluctant democrats so you know you've been sort of
[Guest]: we wrote on the islamization of kashmir yeah i mean which is was such a personal tragedy for me
[Guest]: because we sought kashmiris as resistant in a secular fashion and then you see because of
[Guest]: infiltration from pakistan you see the islamization of that movement all that is being reported in
[Guest]: combat true to our word that you know minority communalism feeds into majority communalism and
[Amit Varma]: we were constantly having our antennas up for it remarkable you know some of the things that you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned in the build-up to godhra what was happening in gujarat really struck me like you
[Amit Varma]: speak uh you've written about this uh session in amitabad in september 2001 where you wrote about
[Amit Varma]: how during this uh three-day training of dalit and muslim women quote dalit women spoke of the
[Amit Varma]: rss slash bajrang dal luring their sons at three thousand four thousand per month to attend camps
[Amit Varma]: where they were taught how to wield lathis and arms muslim women spoke of how the how their
[Amit Varma]: children were not allowed to carry eggs in their tiffin to school abuses among the community had
[Amit Varma]: become sharper and uh shriller uh stop quote and elsewhere you write about how as part of a cover
[Amit Varma]: story you were doing you got you accessed an anonymous pamphlet which was what being widely
[Amit Varma]: circulated that had hindutva uh that had a hindutva and om symbol and quote it was a detailed
[Amit Varma]: instruction manual for the carders on how to file false complaints and mislead the police after
[Amit Varma]: leading violent attacks a senior gujarat serving police officer had used this circular widely in
[Amit Varma]: trainings to warn carders of the gujarat police on the dangers posed by such supremacist organization
[Amit Varma]: stop quote and obviously uh you know uh ashish khaitan later in 2007 um the tehelka operation
[Amit Varma]: kalang that he did spoke about how bombs guns and other weaponry had been brought to gujarat
[Amit Varma]: from punjab rajasthan and other states months before the mass killing stop code this was also
[Amit Varma]: a quote so you know all of this is happening and i think you mentioned uh in your book that just a
[Amit Varma]: week before godhra you want someone in bangalore and they just laughed at you laughed and got angry
[Guest]: in fact some of them laughed but one of my friends from gujarat are angry saying why do you keep on
[Guest]: saying this at every meeting i said because i really sensing a terrible fear that there's a
[Amit Varma]: build-up and that build-up is something we are ignoring so tell me about um february 27 2002
[Guest]: when your phone started ringing oh it was one of those awful days because i think it started ringing
[Guest]: from early morning about soon after 9 9 15 9 30 and i must have got i think over 170 200 calls that
[Guest]: day and uh you know mobiles i mean i keep telling people that mobile phones were very expensive at
[Guest]: that time 22 rupees a minute so it was not like today when you have all these different cheap
[Guest]: packages so it must have cost people a lot of money to call and and there were desperate calls
[Guest]: all over districts people whom i had met through all my coverage and network and activism who were
[Guest]: just reporting on the fear and helplessness after the godhra incident because already the mobilizations
[Guest]: had started and they were worried that they would be targeted so one just spent the next two and a
[Guest]: half three days just making calls to police officers district officers sps calling delhi
[Guest]: calling people like nirmala nirmala deshpande whoever one could think of to motivate them to
[Guest]: do whatever they could it was a very desperate time and then the next day the violence started
[Amit Varma]: uh first amitabad and then all the villages and i was struck by this sentence where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote my phone records carry in them the geography of the attacks the root of the violence from one
[Amit Varma]: end of gujarat to another stop quote and i you know i remember after the tsunami that had struck
[Amit Varma]: i had traveled down um the coast of tamil nadu with a friend and one of the things that i that
[Amit Varma]: really struck me and i remember writing about it is that everywhere where we went where the tsunami
[Amit Varma]: had hit the clocks had stopped and you could make out from the time on the stop clocks all across
[Amit Varma]: the beach so it's it's it's like a mapping of that as well and in your case it's a phone records
[Amit Varma]: so what was going on because one of the things that was different this time that you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: is that earlier when you would call the police they would send someone they would do something
[Amit Varma]: something would happen this time that wasn't the case not always i mean in some cases it
[Guest]: happened it was obviously not universally like that but it and it was not just about me i mean
[Guest]: you look at the reports of times of india indian express everybody at that time because the media
[Guest]: was still doing a very decent job largely and they were reporting this there were distress calls which
[Guest]: were not being responded to in fact i still remember one conversation with the lieutenant
[Guest]: general of the army zameeruddin shah who was there and i recalled this with him later because he got
[Guest]: very annoyed with me and somebody had passed on his number to me because of his availability
[Guest]: because army had been called in by 28th of first first by first of march they were in place and he
[Guest]: kept on saying that every time you're calling me and giving me details of where the attacks are
[Guest]: taking place but actually when i'm telling the police they are saying that no they're not
[Guest]: happening they're happening somewhere else so what is this he was very annoyed sounding not annoyed
[Guest]: as irate he was probably hassled by all the calls so i just kept silent for a few minutes and i said
[Guest]: sir this i i can only say that please decide which of the two bits of information are correct i won't
[Guest]: say anything more and then there was completely stand silence and he said thank you and put on
[Guest]: the phone because there was nothing else i could say but then i kept calling him and he kept taking
[Guest]: the messages so it's it was not a it was not nice at all it was very very distasteful and
[Guest]: it was clear that the the official explanation is that they were overwhelmed but it was very
[Guest]: clear according to me that there was a lack of response when did you so when did you go there
[Amit Varma]: i went there on the third third of third of march in your book you've got this
[Amit Varma]: striking paraway you write quote on fourth march i was at a relief camp the shah alam camp in
[Amit Varma]: amidabad i remember meeting women from naroda patia there they described how they had reached
[Amit Varma]: the dargah they came with no clothes on when they were rescued a humiliation easy to recount but
[Amit Varma]: difficult to comprehend this meant they had been stripped of clothes and dignity apart from being
[Amit Varma]: physically abused for the better part of 12 to 13 hours they sat in that state at the police station
[Amit Varma]: they had been brought back bloodied bruised and naked to the camp stop quote and later you write
[Amit Varma]: quote it is chilling that for seven to eight hours the whole locality was actually enjoying
[Amit Varma]: a massacre when you have women and men celebrating the persistent hounding and killing including the
[Amit Varma]: daylight rapes of young girls and women it is reflective of the public space before and after
[Amit Varma]: the macabre violence such violence also qualitatively affects the space in that area
[Amit Varma]: stop couldn't you go on this of course reminds me of hannah arendt's phrase the banality of evil but
[Amit Varma]: what tells and this is a story we heard time and time again even bilkis bano's rapists and the
[Amit Varma]: killers of her child and all the all the family members were our neighbors there were people
[Amit Varma]: around her there were people otherwise you would consider just normal people and at a time like
[Amit Varma]: this you have an entire locality just chilling out enjoying a massacre as it happens and
[Amit Varma]: apparently not feeling a thing and when we speak of the rule of law you know you can convict a few
[Amit Varma]: people you can convict ringleaders as indeed you have right some of them you have some of them yeah
[Amit Varma]: yeah but the point is everybody participated and that's just such a horrifying thought that
[Amit Varma]: everybody participated like you've spoken of many victims who cannot go back to where they lived
[Amit Varma]: where all this happened to them but even those who go back i can't imagine the kind of denial they
[Amit Varma]: must have to live in when they know that the people around them are the people who did all of
[Amit Varma]: this you know and it's not just a handful of people and a handful of ruffians and a handful of
[Amit Varma]: you know ringleaders how does one come to terms with that no actually that is why i think it's
[Guest]: very important to grapple with this question further and move out of just naroda party also
[Guest]: look at the whole phenomenon come back to partition look at rwanda because i met i met
[Guest]: i met this amazing activist who worked in rwanda and she was telling me once that what happens when
[Guest]: every person from the utus with has been involved in the massacre of tootsies you know there's not
[Guest]: a single family that's not been involved so you're talking about an entire section of people
[Guest]: you know including catholic nuns sometimes you know horrific stories that came out of
[Guest]: rwanda at that time the 800 000 people massacred so what is it that drives populations to this
[Guest]: level of an expanse of bestiality and more important as you said how do you recover from
[Guest]: it how does a society then re-engage with each other and reconstruct i mean it's like
[Guest]: i mean for me it's extremely difficult to find i can't give any recipe or this thing because it has
[Guest]: to be through the voices of the survivors who tell us the solutions we cannot cannot in any means
[Guest]: give a solution to them it has to be a solution that maybe we can help facilitate as sensitive
[Guest]: human beings but how can we be the ones who give it to them i have no answer to that but i just
[Guest]: feel and this is what i keep urging people that as a society we cannot turn our blind eye to what
[Guest]: we are unleashing on our own people and we can't do this by shutting out conversations as if it
[Guest]: didn't happen or by blurring the narrative or turning the narrative on its head or saying that
[Guest]: you know this is all spontaneous or i mean at least let's engage with the kind of horrors that
[Guest]: we've been able to at least those that we witness in our lifetimes you know even if partition is
[Guest]: too far back and it is difficult to reconstruct every single incident or every area and region
[Guest]: and which community was affected at least what we know is is that that is reasonably true that
[Guest]: it has happened it's been reported and before anybody kind of accuses me of you know saying
[Guest]: what i said about naroda bhatt you just have to read the judgment of judge jyotsnaya yagnik
[Guest]: which came out on 29th of august 2012 and what she speaks and how and the credibility she gives and
[Guest]: and the way she talks about the integrity of the witnesses who have spoken up and for me that
[Guest]: experience of supporting those women survivors that that cjp did was that for the first time in
[Guest]: the history of this country the narrative of gender violence was brought back during a trial
[Guest]: normally the court process blurs it out it sanitizes it or refuses to admit it for the
[Guest]: first time it was possible and that was that brief glimmer that the supreme court monitoring
[Guest]: gave this process before it sort of sunk into something else was that these were supreme
[Guest]: court monitored trials they were specially appointed judges some of them so certain
[Guest]: integrity to some of those processes existed not all but i think that's the learning experience
[Guest]: that as a society it's not about these as well it's not about gujarat 2002 could be about nelly
[Guest]: it could be about 84 i mean how many sikh families have got justice for 84 compared i mean i think
[Guest]: it's equally shameful i think it's important to as a society are we going to accept and
[Guest]: deliberate with some sensitivity on what makes us fall prey to this level of bestiality and violence
[Guest]: for me that's the abiding question it's not about one individual or one state but it's how an entire
[Amit Varma]: neighborhood can do this what are your candidate answers to that rhetorical question about what
[Amit Varma]: makes us do this like is this really uh is this really the human condition is all this uh civil
[Amit Varma]: society a sort of a facade and everything is contingent and yes there but for the grace of god
[Guest]: go i you know if i were to accept that then i would not get stories which i got out of gujarat
[Guest]: also which we did good news gujarat one whole cover story we did a year later in july 2003
[Guest]: june 2003 which is that whether it was sardarpura where 33 people were massacred in one house
[Guest]: sheikh moella or whether it was godhra or whether it was even ahmedabad ahmedabad naroda you have
[Guest]: the most outstanding stories of bravery in the midst of that bestiality yes they were a minority
[Guest]: they were kind of completely outnumbered but if if that was if the human condition was that
[Guest]: brutal voyeurism then why did those acts take place is my question why did those policemen
[Guest]: which were a hopeless minority stick their out necks out for the constitution
[Guest]: and us even today paying for it you know uh there is always going to be this battle
[Guest]: between the predominant majority majority narrative and the resistance and maybe at
[Guest]: many many points of time the hate wins but i don't think hate wins all the time and i think
[Guest]: anyway the endeavor for us should be at least the endeavor for people like us should be that
[Guest]: one tries to interrogate which is what communism combat was what koj is what our work in assam is
[Guest]: at the moment and that's why i would urge your your listeners to you know visit the cjp website
[Guest]: cjp.org or dot in look at the kind of work we are doing it's it's many fold it's not just about
[Guest]: targeted violence against minorities it's also about adivasis land and livelihood rights it's
[Guest]: also about citizenship rights it's about constitutional values in the classroom hate
[Guest]: hate watch is very much part is that what are the manner in which we can equip
[Guest]: citizenry societies villages to ensure that the lone voices become the majority
[Guest]: the lone voices which i still believe are many fold become a kind of cohesive majority and i
[Guest]: feel that's the effort and that should be the effort that is a effort i think we do not have
[Guest]: the luxury of saying that the human condition is the hateful condition i can't we cannot do that
[Amit Varma]: we just cannot do that so when you went there uh you know you mentioned in your book about how
[Amit Varma]: a friend asked you about how it was and you said remember how bad 92 93 was this is 1000 times
[Amit Varma]: worse and another thing that comes across really well in your book is the extent of it it was not
[Amit Varma]: just amitabad it was you know the majority of the districts in the state it was hundreds of
[Amit Varma]: villages it was like targeted planned elsewhere you've also written about how in the months
[Amit Varma]: preceding this there were these census documents drawn up of where muslims stay where christians
[Amit Varma]: stay everything so you know that data was kind of made for a reason i think you showed it to
[Amit Varma]: justice verma if i remember and he said he has similar data and what was that period like because
[Guest]: you were attacked a number of times while you were yeah i was attacked five times including my
[Guest]: the car and the driver leaving me in a village and going away justice verma himself witnessed
[Guest]: when he was in the car in front when my car the back was attacked before turned into godhra
[Guest]: there were ad-hoc attacks towards anybody who was trying to
[Guest]: record or witness any of the violence that takes place i still remember this elderly gentleman in
[Guest]: jamalpur telling me that beta if you're going to because i was the first journalist that is what
[Guest]: the editors guild report says rights and wrongs that's a report which is worth reading that
[Guest]: which says that you know the communism combat was the only one that carried the rural
[Guest]: spread of the violence because i was the first one who visited so i remember this elderly gent
[Guest]: telling me that uh if you're going to go out of amdabad then remember you just wear a
[Guest]: uh to put wear a saffron dupatta and a tikka otherwise without that you'll be
[Guest]: targeted so you know there was all of that hotelieries 1100 hotels belonging to the muslim
[Guest]: chilya community had been brutalized i mean you know the economic loss and devastation was
[Guest]: as bad as the loss of human lives which we calculated post godhra to be 1928 or
[Guest]: whatever according to the chart sheets close to 2000 1920 and you know as indians we tend to not
[Guest]: count the numbers about loss we think that we try to valorize only the lives lost but i think
[Guest]: you know even the cii put the loss at several thousand crores you know so this was all a
[Guest]: matter of record and the national human rights commission's report interim report final report
[Guest]: follow-up reports the chief election commissioner lindow's report of 2002 they document some of this
[Guest]: apart from the work that some of us have done so but there is still a desire today to change
[Guest]: the narrative to turn the narrative around i mean history will tell as to how far that will go
[Amit Varma]: tell me now about how citizens for justice and peace cjp came about like at what point
[Amit Varma]: uh did you feel the need for something like this that what you guys were doing
[Amit Varma]: there needed to be another superstructure on top of that it just it wasn't enough tell me about that
[Guest]: whole process actually the organization was born out of the realization that you know we need to
[Guest]: have a group of citizens involved in the civil and legal rights issue which will look at supporting
[Guest]: survivors of targeted violence then we look at the whole issue of constitutional values in the
[Guest]: classroom and now we're looking at citizenship rights so basically legal rights and legal aid
[Guest]: is the concept behind cjp and you know if we wanted to engage in battling those cases
[Guest]: of course gujarat 2002 but not only that because we've also done
[Guest]: engagements with bomb blast survivors 26 11 before that in gujarat etc uh it's important to
[Guest]: see what that whole process of engagement will mean it means understanding the law it means
[Guest]: legal aid it means uh staying with the survivor for for periods of time that are long because our
[Guest]: court process takes so long you know and advocacy and all of that so that is why it was set up and
[Guest]: many of the persons then and now were involved in cjp had seen bombay burn in 92 93 so i thought that
[Guest]: was a very important understanding and link that came out of that now of course we have some new
[Guest]: people also and the it was very important to have that that thing in place now i just want to say
[Guest]: that you know the experience we got out of 92 93 bombay where we didn't actually engage in the
[Guest]: courts but we were engaged in the campaigning for the sri krishna commission report to make sure the
[Guest]: report was published getting it published we actually published the report two editions of it
[Guest]: was also very important to understand that you know that do we stop there or do we now get into
[Guest]: the courts and also battle the cases so that was one part of the story and now we've actually
[Guest]: reached a stage which is very fascinating because i think the experience has also meant that you
[Guest]: know for for human rights and civil liberties and legal aid to be used in the courts and to
[Guest]: and legal aid to be sustaining and enduring we need to create local teams on the ground so
[Guest]: therefore to have this team that's going in asam which is a really vibrant team of 25 plus people
[Guest]: paralegal and lawyers who are working on the question of citizenship i don't know how many
[Guest]: people in the rest of india know but this whole nrc process national register of citizens process
[Guest]: which which it's important to tell your listeners this because you know asam has a 3.3 crore
[Guest]: roughly population and at least a third of them are kind of completely being
[Guest]: there's a humanitarian crisis of huge proportions so there's a background and trajectory to it but
[Guest]: the conflict and the violence in asam pre and post the asam accord has led to kind of
[Guest]: led to kind of demand quote unquote that outsiders should be identified and citizens should be
[Guest]: citizenship should be scrutinized in a particular way and the matter was taken to the supreme court
[Guest]: and all of that it's a complicated thing and on the cjp website you get a lot of information about
[Guest]: it in 2016-17 when the draft list was brought out draft final list as many as 44 lakh people
[Guest]: were left out of citizenship which is like a huge number then when the final final list came in
[Guest]: in 2019 which is august 31st the number came down to 19 lakhs now even that is being contested by
[Guest]: the political class they seem to want to reopen it further but what has this entire process meant
[Guest]: first of all it's a huge cost to the state exchequer figures like 1700 1800 crores are being
[Guest]: crores are being thrown around this is the kind of money that has been worsted on this whole exercise
[Guest]: but it has meant that virtually in every village in the state of asam you have families and
[Guest]: extended families who are completely devastated by this and their meager allowances are being spent
[Guest]: on you know trying to navigate a very very hostile legal system the foreigner tribunal
[Guest]: etc now you have something a creature called the foreigner tribunal in asam which is a kind of a
[Guest]: legal entity pre-independence under the foreigners act very complicated which is doesn't happen
[Guest]: anywhere else in india and the the adjudication there the level of evidence gathering there is
[Guest]: completely contra to what the indian evidence act says so you know all of this has meant
[Guest]: first of all me and our team understanding this issue then us trying to do legal education with
[Guest]: batch of lawyers who have been doing this for a long time but trying to discuss and how we can do
[Guest]: it better understanding the superior court judgments high court and supreme court and
[Guest]: trying to bring in national and international law so all this been a very intense exercise for the
[Guest]: last seven years and we've been very lucky to build up a very very vibrant team and the work
[Guest]: carries on day to day week to week and village to village in about 12 districts and for me the
[Guest]: greatest satisfaction when i was incarcerated the last three four months is that the work of this
[Guest]: kind whether it was hate watch or assam or constitutional class in the classroom in purvanchal
[Guest]: continued and i think there was a first shell shocked of the first week when it all happened
[Guest]: and i was arrested but after that teams galvanized and motivated each other and the work carried on
[Guest]: and for me that is the biggest answer to this kind of strategy and this kind of targeting
[Guest]: is that the work should not stop the work simply should not stop that's inspiring you know why
[Amit Varma]: don't we see more of this particular asam problem in the mainstream media is it because there is
[Amit Varma]: some kind of a north bias so much of media is happening from delhi what's the deal it's a gay
[Guest]: it's a very good question i mean you will find almost zero coverage or even in the alternate
[Guest]: portals actually because i mean a little bit comes into scroll and wire of course occasionally but
[Guest]: i mean consistent coverage you'll only see on the cjp website or on the sabrang website because we
[Guest]: are engaged there simply because we are getting that report and information but you know there's
[Guest]: always been a bias in the quote-unquote indian media even when i'm talking about the better days
[Guest]: of journalism i'm talking about the 80s and 70s against the northeast the east and the northeast
[Guest]: orissa bengal and the seven sisters i mean the northeastern states are never covered never come
[Guest]: so if there's a if there's violence there there's a conflict there if there are floods there maybe
[Guest]: for a few days but not looking at some of these endemic problems which are being unleashed so
[Guest]: according to me the quote-unquote commercial media nationally is doing very very big service
[Guest]: disservice to the people of asam by not having regular coverage this changed a little bit around
[Guest]: 2019 when the citizenship amendment bill was passed and all these protests erupted because
[Guest]: inevitably some of us who had been working even before that on asam were asked to speak about how
[Guest]: this has whole and this entire trajectory of proof of documented citizenship has unfolded in asam
[Guest]: and when we started sharing the horrific experience there and warning that this could happen anywhere
[Guest]: in india if this was not protested enough that is when there was a little bit of coverage in
[Guest]: other places but very momentary because soon you had covid and the lockdown and you know media just
[Amit Varma]: forgets these stories very quickly yeah it's a event to event and not really uh staying on for
[Amit Varma]: longer with a story let's go back to the aftermath of 2002 and not just the aftermath 2002 itself
[Amit Varma]: and at one point you speak about how you know there was this mob or vhp slash bajrang dal people
[Amit Varma]: who were chanting with impunity police right and this is uh by commission or omission
[Amit Varma]: you know this was true as you've documented in your book and elsewhere and as we kind of know
[Amit Varma]: you've already you mentioned that anecdote about the general who told you that the police are
[Amit Varma]: giving him locations of villages where nothing has happened and you know and no it's it was like
[Guest]: in ahemdabad a certain direction would be pointed out when there was not but actually something's
[Amit Varma]: happened somewhere else actually it's happened somewhere else so the you know willful misdirection
[Amit Varma]: so on the one hand there is in fact he's he has written a book zamiruddin shah on the entire
[Amit Varma]: experience of gujarat which is very interesting i'll link that from the show notes as well as
[Amit Varma]: so many other links and so on the one hand there is a police which the moment that the state
[Amit Varma]: government is of a particular dispensation the police is going along on the other hand you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about uh the judiciary and you have of course spoken about the outliers uh in the judiciary
[Amit Varma]: like joshua yagnik who you know gave that great sort of judgment himanshu trivedi who left a
[Amit Varma]: facebook message uh praising you uh you know ex-judge of the by tips in the retail in best
[Amit Varma]: bakery yeah yeah so those seem like outliers more and more the worry is that if the dispensation in
[Amit Varma]: power you know bends a particular way sooner or later they'll capture all the institutions and
[Amit Varma]: this is something i discussed at length with josie joseph you know he's written a book on
[Amit Varma]: the deep state so to say and that's again an eye-opening book in an eye-opening episode
[Amit Varma]: so what what is your experience with this because on the one hand you come from literally a family
[Amit Varma]: of people who've believed in this rule of law it's a co-tenant right and then you encounter
[Amit Varma]: this system where it feels like a frustrating uphill battle but you stick to your principles
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of continue down that path and you've had some success but you also had a lot
[Amit Varma]: of frustration so how do you how do you look back on these struggles and do you you know
[Amit Varma]: do you still hold out hope because to me it seems like you know just hoping that some
[Amit Varma]: outstanding individual will make a good judgment that goes for you is you know systemically it just
[Guest]: seems that you know while that is true i would put it the other way that the only way a system
[Guest]: can be held accountable is through engagement with it if you decide to disengage completely
[Guest]: with the system whether it is the uh police or the courts or the judiciary or the election
[Guest]: election process electoral presidency i'm just not going to vote i don't know whether you're
[Guest]: going to ever get it any hope of it any revival or reform or improvement so that's the broad
[Guest]: sweep secondly i'd like to also point out apart from what josie's uh written look at two very
[Guest]: outstanding recent interviews that karan has done on one was with justice ap shah and that
[Guest]: piece he wrote in the hindu is actually what that interview is based on and it's somewhere
[Guest]: like justice ap shah jeet prakash shah uh former law commission delhi high court uh chief justice
[Guest]: you know writing that i'm sorry writing that in hindu and then elaborating at length in that
[Guest]: interview and what is he saying you know he's saying that the challenges uh to the judiciary
[Guest]: post 2014 and then you have of course uh senior counsel mr dushyant davey uh talking about our
[Guest]: incoming chief justice so see these are issues that are being looked at with concern and debate
[Guest]: and we've had judgments which are which have offered hope and their judgments which have
[Guest]: raised huge alarm and concern i don't want to get into those individuals because
[Guest]: individual cases because it would not be appropriate but i will say that uh an institution
[Guest]: eventually if i talk about the judiciary here will be judged by the sum total of what it does
[Guest]: and of course it will also be judged by its major what is seen to be major hurdles or obstacles when
[Guest]: it has not met met the exacting standards of substantive justice however i'll also say that
[Guest]: you know the ironic thing about this whole process is some of the irony that you yourself
[Guest]: mentioned is that it's much easier not to battle in the courts i want to also mention this and
[Guest]: flag this that it's much easy to do any sort of activism but does not involve the courts because
[Guest]: and that is something that feminists have learned something that uh civil rights activists have
[Guest]: learned that this is a far more quote-unquote demanding process it's when you're in the courts
[Guest]: that the reprisal is greater because they're sworn affidavits and then the agents of the state
[Guest]: representative of the states are going to be held accountable ostensibly for what they've done or
[Guest]: not done so it is it is a far more problematic and risky but i see that not doing it at all or
[Guest]: assuming i don't think anybody who engages in the courts whether it's a pucl or whether it's us or
[Guest]: the association for democratic reforms or anybody does it with the hope that they're looking for
[Guest]: that one messiah individual no but what you're looking for is some level of exacting this thing
[Guest]: on constitutional values from an institution that's supposed to be a constitutional court
[Guest]: whether it's a high court or a supreme court so i think it's with that hope that you go there
[Guest]: otherwise you might as well say if you want extends your argument further that you know leave
[Guest]: aside this battle to the courts wait or don't wait for that day when it happens and fight your battles
[Guest]: elsewhere you know in the discursive arena in the communication arena and the media arena
[Guest]: and i don't know whether that by itself is enough you know so neither is only this enough for sure
[Guest]: like i've said earlier as well that if this battle takes place in isolation and there is no support
[Guest]: from the public or from political class or from the opposition then too it gets rendered isolationist
[Guest]: and you get you can get targeted but i think uh the uh important thing is to continue to engage uh
[Guest]: rework strategies uh sometimes you need to rework strategies and uh rework issues but but to keep at
[Guest]: it anyway and one of the uh historic kind of quotations that students of the law are always
[Guest]: told is that the the law is really presently made by dissenting judgments not the majority judgment
[Guest]: no that's interesting yeah so that is one of the things you're you're compelled to see
[Guest]: study and read as students of the law the dissenting judgment yeah in asking my question
[Amit Varma]: i wasn't really making an argument at all that one should not engage i think one has to do what
[Amit Varma]: one has to do regardless of uh you know uh how uh optimistic we might be about it working out i mean
[Amit Varma]: you know you you have to do what you have to do now i have sort of a question about
[Amit Varma]: whether something has changed fundamentally in the last 20 years in terms of technology empowering
[Amit Varma]: citizens like us like you pointed out at one point in your book that you know when zahira
[Amit Varma]: sheikh turned hostile the in the best bakery case the reason that you guys were able to push through
[Amit Varma]: is that you had footage shot i think by pankaj sharma um you had footage of her you know talking
[Amit Varma]: about what had happened and therefore you know that helped that was evidenced by itself and
[Amit Varma]: helped you make the case and today we are sort of living in an era where smartphones have become
[Amit Varma]: ubiquitous broadband has become uh cheap a little bit of credit to your favorite uh neighborhood
[Amit Varma]: industrialist mr ambani but be that as it may today you're not going to have a mass burial go
[Amit Varma]: undocumented someone or the other you know the chances are just much greater that uh it will be
[Amit Varma]: uh it will be documented that a lot else will be documented and therefore it is much harder to get
[Amit Varma]: away with uh anything it is it is much harder for the unseen to remain unseen as it were is this
[Amit Varma]: something that a you've seen playing out and b that it uh sort of gives you hope that you know
[Amit Varma]: now you can't you know and there is no such thing as under the cover of night anymore
[Guest]: uh see uh i am two or three levels of my answer again one is that you know during the zahira
[Guest]: sheikh time it was not simply that pankaj sharma that was important i think important thing was
[Guest]: that she herself had given previous statements to the national human rights commission signed
[Guest]: affidavits to the nana vati commission where they were you know where the whole version had been laid
[Guest]: out so her suddenly saying that all of this was not correct or was coerced out of me was could not
[Guest]: hold out in a court of law and i went to the supreme court you know saying that her allegations
[Guest]: are serious and please investigate which very few people know i said that when she made those
[Guest]: allegations i said please investigate and that's when the supreme court set up a registrar uh
[Guest]: general's inquiry we all appeared she had to appear and then that is that inquiry that found
[Guest]: her guilty of perjury and all of that so but it's a arduous process to kind of counter all of that's
[Guest]: right coming back to what i'd said earlier that once you engage in it there's a risk of this
[Guest]: happening then it's an arduous process to then have correction and a lot of energy goes into that
[Guest]: as much as fighting the actual battle besides that what i want to say that technology is it's
[Guest]: it's not an apolitical beast okay so let's not completely glamorize it because i want to just
[Guest]: flag five six very very problematic things that have happened with the same technology and not
[Guest]: with the kind of result that you're yes certainly it's coming to the public gaze but it has not
[Guest]: generated the kind of outrage that at least i would want and i'm sure you would want and one
[Guest]: is this recent public flogging of muslim young men in kheda other one was a similar kind of incident
[Guest]: in jharkhand which uh which where you had this horrendous killing and lynching and all of these
[Guest]: are being captured on through technology by the perpetrators you know so they're not attempting
[Guest]: to hide them they're actually wanting to play to the uh the support base that you were talking
[Guest]: about to be able to galvanize more hysteria and hate uh in their corner so i think let's also flag
[Guest]: that issue when you when you raise this question and having said that yes if if technology is truly
[Guest]: democratized and has it been i don't think so i think it's not been democratized if you really
[Guest]: look at how deep penetration internet is uh uh it's i think it's it's a patchy story i wouldn't
[Guest]: say it's a negative story but it's a patchy story i mean even now there are a place in uttar pradesh
[Guest]: including banaras and others where it's very bad internet penetration is very bad so you can't have
[Guest]: zoom calls and conversations so it's i'm just saying that let's also be very clear that the
[Guest]: penetration is very patchy i'm not uh and if somebody would like you were to map where india
[Guest]: has really good broadband i think it might tell a different kind of story so yes it is possible
[Guest]: and feasible today that there's going to be a huge god forbid a huge targeted violence tragedy or
[Guest]: something happens that's either for the wrong reasons like i mentioned or for the right reasons
[Guest]: it will get documented my question is again coming back to what i was thinking as a journalist what
[Guest]: happens then does it generate the kind of response it ought to or should have from either the the
[Guest]: institutions that i request required to correct it or from the political opposition that should
[Guest]: take it up that also is not happening enough is what i feel because i mean just to give this take
[Guest]: up this first example i gave of the flogging you just see that the two major parties in political
[Guest]: opposition in gujarat who are now claiming that they might make some headway i don't know about
[Guest]: winning that is congress and up have just not commented on that incident and i don't know what
[Guest]: kind of message that sends to either the citizenry which is part of the community that of the
[Guest]: policemen that perpetrated it or the survivor victims that have undergone such a humiliation
[Guest]: what does it mean what is that what is that signaling mean i have not seen one of my one of my
[Guest]: constructive criticisms for the higher judiciary which is high courts and supreme court is that
[Guest]: they have a very interesting power called the suo moto which is that you can actually see some
[Guest]: violations of fundamental rights taking place through the media through the social media and
[Guest]: actually generate a legal action without it being brought to your notice and there have been
[Guest]: occasions when the court has done that but those occasions are very rare i have not seen any
[Guest]: constitutional courts be it in jharkhand or anywhere up or gujarat or anywhere actually
[Guest]: initiate sumo to action on these kind of public violent humiliations and targeted violence against
[Guest]: minorities for a long long time it didn't happen earlier didn't happen it's not even happen earlier
[Guest]: even before so i don't i will not put the 2014 marker for that you know even it did not happen
[Guest]: in nelly did not happen in 84 in fact i've had very very intense discussions with advocate hs
[Guest]: fulka who's a one of the advocates who's really stuck by the sikh survivors of the 84 pogrom
[Guest]: where the congress party was involved and he says that you know the kind of silence he encountered
[Guest]: from the institutions was was was awful and in fact at least in gujarat we got a few glimmerings
[Guest]: of hope with a couple of very good judgments from the supreme court transferring best bakery
[Guest]: bilkis bano out of the state sending certain signals whereas they got nothing so you know i
[Guest]: think some of these introspections are important and necessary as to when was it the national
[Guest]: security narrative around mrs gandhi's killing uh that it was a sick body what was it that
[Guest]: prevented uh the higher constitutional courts from intervening because it was delhi it was
[Guest]: happening in delhi so you could not claim that you did not know every wretched resident of the
[Guest]: capital would know judge or not a judge so why was that no there was no sumo to action i mean these
[Guest]: are issues that need wider discussion and debate and i think some of this is also linked to the
[Guest]: fact that we need to have sane sensible debates and conversations about institutions without
[Guest]: hysterical responses or be or be threatened contempt of court or anything because i think
[Guest]: you're not talking about crass motives sometimes what you're talking about is a general level of
[Guest]: lack of accountability and i think that is something that citizens should start engaging
[Guest]: in you know so whether it's a question of how higher courts deal with uh sexual assault or
[Guest]: rape or in posco cases when you have a string of judgments suddenly it's not string but i've seen
[Guest]: at least three or four saying that you know everything will be fine as long as the the
[Guest]: perpetrator marries the victim i mean i just just the thought makes me cringe you know that is this
[Guest]: a notion of substantive justice in the criminal law amendment by the way i have to point out i did
[Amit Varma]: an episode with rukmini s who's written a great book on data journalism as well and what she found
[Amit Varma]: out through her work was that a lot of these cases are actually cases where a couple elope
[Amit Varma]: and then the girl's parents file a case and then it goes to the court and the judge's way out you
[Guest]: so that you guys have to get married so but but is that the way out i mean even first of all in
[Guest]: those cases it's fine but in one madhya pradesh case that was certainly not the case where there's
[Guest]: a hierarchy and it'll be okay but my point is that even if that is the case is that the way
[Guest]: the judiciary should have you should either deal with it head on and say that listen this is a
[Guest]: marriage by choice yeah so therefore it's not no no see it's not rape it's consensual and therefore
[Guest]: but you can't leave it halfway because you don't want to confront the parental authorities
[Guest]: but anyway i'm i'm just mentioning that in any case you had this other very problematic judgment
[Guest]: from the bombay high court saying that you know uh touch of a certain kind it doesn't
[Guest]: does not constitute offense under posco so there could be any number of such or the feeble no
[Guest]: judgment there's no end to these yeah so my point is any of these issues is not just about targeted
[Guest]: violence against minorities any of these issues requires forums that sanely debate this in the
[Guest]: in the public arena so that the echo chambers that judges live in also is not just of hysteria
[Guest]: and the social media but where the sensible debates also get to them because i think they
[Guest]: need to understand that the the citizenry is thinking about it talking about it how how the
[Guest]: judiciary is being evaluated because this is in any mature democracy this is important
[Guest]: a lot of power is wielded by different institutions of governance whether it's the police whether it's
[Guest]: law enforcement whether it's the ib whether it's the judiciary so i think all these institutions
[Guest]: should realize that debates and criticisms as long as they're healthy and not shrill and
[Guest]: silly are needed to improve the the caliber and the quality of governance
[Amit Varma]: i buy a cautionary note about technology and you know is there perhaps a shifting of the problem
[Guest]: from nobody knows about this to nobody cares about this because almost and that's that comes
[Guest]: back to your earlier question and a question that every sensible person asks are we just getting
[Guest]: numbed by this kind of looking at these images and circulating them on whatsapp and not not
[Guest]: reflecting on where they come from and what they mean but just quickly forwarding or not forwarding
[Guest]: them or whatever it is you know what does this kind of relentless violence images mean imagery
[Guest]: mean so i think it's it's really a question we need to grapple with because i will not as a
[Guest]: journalist ever argue for any kind of censorship ever because i think that that could be much more
[Guest]: harmful than anything else but but i think we need to ask where that is coming from how is it being
[Guest]: how is it traveling who is who is allowing it to become viral you know all these terminologies that
[Guest]: we are using and then we all know about the it cells working we know about all of the money behind
[Guest]: this powering of the social media we know how elections are being now powered by data collection
[Guest]: and so there's so many layers to this where i think you know just just sanitizing and seeing
[Guest]: technologies empowering is not enough because just now the there's a huge power imbalance
[Amit Varma]: huge power imbalance yeah i mean i mean the the the striking another striking image that i saw
[Amit Varma]: earlier this week was and you must have seen it too was of this 14 year old girl who'd been raped
[Amit Varma]: and she was lying bleeding on the ground and you have this picture of a bunch of men in front of
[Amit Varma]: her not helping her but taking videos of her or pictures of her on their cell phones horrific image
[Amit Varma]: thereby reducing her from a real person to an image on a phone which is like you know it's
[Amit Varma]: it's horrific just losing your humanity here's a proposition i think i first uh you know presented
[Amit Varma]: it to our car and i want to see what you think in my view you know uh in india we have three huge
[Amit Varma]: problems and the first problem is approximate problem and you and i will agree on it and that's
[Amit Varma]: a political problem of the particular dispensation in charge right but i think there are two deeper
[Amit Varma]: and longer lasting problems which will remain with us and i'm i can't think of a way to solve them
[Amit Varma]: one we have uh already uh spoken about which is the society that we are in that it's an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: regressive society and more assertive now than it was earlier so what do we do about that that's one
[Amit Varma]: and the other deeper problem is just the indian state which has always been an over-powerful
[Amit Varma]: centralized predatory state where uh you know all the organs of the state become tools of the
[Amit Varma]: political party in charge right so yeah there's a proximate problem and one hopes that something
[Amit Varma]: emerges in our politics and we can get past this but those two deeper problems i don't know how we
[Amit Varma]: get past because you can't just say that you know let us you know let's introduce ideas into the
[Amit Varma]: discourse about how to make the state better and make it better and no that ain't gonna happen
[Amit Varma]: because people you know the state will not let us change the state you know it is what it is
[Amit Varma]: those in power are not going to give up power so what is sort of uh your sense in that do you also
[Amit Varma]: you know do you agree with my broad formulation or is there something you'd like to add to these
[Guest]: no i just like to uh nuance your second proposition um while not discounting the
[Guest]: first and third at all which is yes the society today that is the kind of huge support echo
[Guest]: chamber for this kind of political dispensation that is our problem i'll reiterate what i said
[Guest]: right in the beginning i think is that you know what are the numbers are we talking about i mean
[Guest]: where do we balance the numbers yes there is no question in my mind that a large section of our
[Guest]: society has become the support chamber the support base for this kind of politics but i'm not still
[Guest]: willing to believe that it has crossed 50 51 i mean that too on the very outside okay so that
[Guest]: is the first thing the question is what about the rest are the rest and uncaring couldn't they couldn't
[Guest]: care one way or the other are they scared are they scattered what is it that is what we need to
[Guest]: figure out i don't have a uh pat answer for that i think it's some of all these three that they are
[Guest]: uncaring some of them but i think a lot a lot of them are also scared and many of them are scattered
[Guest]: so the question is the scattered and the scared what do you do with that how do you work with that
[Guest]: etc so that's that's the first thing i just like to first drop in the in my response secondly i
[Guest]: think i don't think one can hope and this thing hope any that hope for the state to improve and
[Guest]: all of that no but i think if one accepts the fact that at the moment the structure exists
[Guest]: and the fact is that for whatever reason we are a notional or real not so real democracy
[Guest]: then do we or do we not speak and i'm asking you this question back do we do we or do we not speak
[Guest]: about things like uh eventually you have the preamble which makes the people sovereign not
[Guest]: the state and therefore every decision of parliament every decision of the supreme court
[Guest]: every decision of the election commission that is constitutional bodies is eventually answerable to
[Guest]: the people at some level obviously in an organized fashion so how do this mass of people become
[Guest]: articulate enough to be able to challenge anything that they find so different wings of the state if
[Guest]: you desegregate because it's too overwhelming otherwise how do you desegregate and actually
[Guest]: start challenging this and can you do it at all that's the question so can you really realistically
[Guest]: talk about judicial reform is it ever going to happen or no our is the appointment of judges
[Guest]: the diversity of judges never really going to change okay those are the questions i think we
[Guest]: need to keep raising okay and i think in the raising of the questions you will maybe get some
[Guest]: answers there cannot be one person or three people giving you the pat answer one of the major reasons
[Guest]: and this was stated by i think by mr sybil the other day when he was being a couple civil when
[Guest]: he was being felicitated for 50 years at the bar is that you know what you need today is a lawyer's
[Guest]: movement for social justice to counter uh the kind of uh silence that is there from the bar today
[Guest]: when there's according to him wrongs done by sections of the judiciary so you know this could
[Guest]: be one answer i don't know but the point is i know from a fact from my father father and grandfather
[Guest]: and great-grandfather and everything that they've experienced from their writings that the bar and
[Guest]: the bench are intrinsically linked okay when you say bar is the not the that bar but the bar which
[Guest]: is the advocacy advocates so if the bar becomes supine like it did during the emergency except
[Guest]: a few outstanding voices then the judiciary also will just have one dissenting hr khanna okay
[Guest]: but i remember that that year in 1973 when the super session took place uh kc college
[Guest]: june i mean an amazing meeting takes place i still have the booklet from that meeting
[Guest]: where you who did you have you had daftari you had hidayatullah you had
[Guest]: uh setelvar you had kt shah nani palkhiwala all of them speaking about on the outrageous
[Guest]: act of the government and superseding and making ray the chief justice so you know there will be
[Guest]: those moments now was that unimportant was that dissent not important i think we the fact that
[Guest]: we are referring it to it today in a conversation means that those dissents become very very
[Guest]: important to the growth of a democracy do i see that dissent today from the bar no which is why
[Guest]: leads someone like mr kapil sibal to make that statement it's coming it's coming from other
[Guest]: sections of the lawyers and advocates who are not the big big names but it's coming from dogged
[Guest]: practitioners who are working you know on the most difficult of cases so uh the issue is how do we
[Guest]: then tackle this all this indian state as you put it do we just give up on tackling on it or do we
[Guest]: try and maybe think of ways to segregate the different wings of it and think of talking about
[Guest]: chipping away and challenging i mean the way the election commission has started behaving is
[Guest]: outrageous it's been written about it's been talked about one or two previous election commissioners
[Guest]: are somewhat writing about it but that's not enough i mean they have to be able to understand
[Guest]: that the voters at some point is eventually whom they are responsible to not the government of the
[Guest]: day but when will those voters get mobilized outside an adr association of democratic reforms
[Guest]: to challenge the election commission that becomes the question of people's mobilization resistance
[Guest]: etc it's a very tough call because it means organizing it means organizing non-violently
[Guest]: in a cohesive way in an informed way communicating this challenge you know all of this means working
[Guest]: on electoral reform judicial reform structural reform criminal justice reform i mean what was
[Guest]: my lessons that what was the lesson that we learned after the best bakery case was that
[Guest]: four things are necessary in our criminal justice system first is independence of investigation
[Guest]: which is police reform which nine police commissions have told us we should do but
[Guest]: nobody wants to do but it's not a citizen's issue it's not an election issue how do we make it that
[Guest]: okay then the question of independence of prosecution
[Guest]: because only i think two or three states in the country have the judiciary appointing the
[Guest]: prosecutors otherwise it's the government appointing the prosecutor so again you have a
[Guest]: collusion when the cases are argued then witness protection which again came to the fore with the
[Guest]: Zahira Sheikh case and finally time-bound trials you can't have criminal trials going on for 10 11
[Guest]: no survivor will have the will have the stamina to even want to live through that tragedy for 12
[Guest]: why should he or she you want to wrap up and move on right so two or three years time-bound trials
[Guest]: now these are very simple things it's not rocket science that i'm sharing with you but who is going
[Guest]: to push it which band of citizens is going to push which political party to make this into an issue
[Guest]: i mean it's it's really not an easy call but the question is whether it needs to be taken or not
[Amit Varma]: yeah no i feel that even if i believe that the cause was hopeless we'd still have to do what we
[Amit Varma]: have to do because we don't do what we do for instrumental reasons if it's the right thing to do
[Amit Varma]: you do it and that's clearly what motivates you as well there's a lot of stuff we can't talk about
[Amit Varma]: you know because it's sub judice but what was what was your feeling like when you were you know
[Guest]: incarcerated recently i won't talk about like i said the case and everything i will i just simply
[Guest]: say that the manner in which it happened was outrageous and completely unlawful the way i was
[Guest]: done but in jail it was it's i mean nothing can be worse than being jailed because your
[Guest]: personal freedom is taken away you feel helpless you feel despairing you feel angry
[Guest]: you feel let down there's also physical discomfort which you're not used to all of that is there
[Guest]: i think eventually human beings have this ability to dig deep into their reserves and
[Guest]: deal with it and we we all did i i did uh you you build relationships with people women other women
[Guest]: inmates in the barrack you you have conversations some of those relationships become very very long
[Guest]: very very long standing uh the the most difficult thing is to cut time is to kind of uh is how do
[Guest]: you cut time and i used to find the greatest solace in writing and reading i wrote a lot
[Guest]: two three thousand words a day handwritten in my diaries what would you write about it's a book
[Guest]: hopefully that'll come out it was basically about everything that i thought i felt my observations
[Guest]: how the political economy of the jail worked on the hard labor of 2025 convicted women
[Guest]: who would be working from 7 a.m to 7 p.m just at three thousand rupees a day you know stuff you
[Guest]: try and find out because the journalist in you is always there stories for individual uh women
[Guest]: under trials and convicts i've written written noted a lot of those stories how to cut the time
[Guest]: then you read and write books and after six o'clock nobody wants the lights on 6 30 so the
[Guest]: bank gets very dark there's a very banal hindi film channel going on with the worst kind of films
[Guest]: so all of that is very tough it's very tough sleep is difficult sometimes
[Guest]: but you manage you manage somehow somehow you find hope in small silly little things
[Guest]: gardening the flowers there's a peacock bird somewhere they're birds i mean this this is the
[Guest]: kind of thing human beings start looking for and i like i said to you sometime in between that the
[Guest]: greatest sucker to me was of course i was lucky enough that my family visited me for the letters
[Guest]: i mean the letters were just unimaginably a huge hope and that's what i keep telling friends after
[Guest]: coming out and organizations and groups that we should ensure that all political prisoners get
[Guest]: letters we should just ensure that we sit down and write to them because that's that that that does
[Guest]: help you know my my huge battle with the jail authorities would be to keep the library open
[Guest]: because they have a very nice reading room in sabarmati mahila jail but they don't keep it
[Guest]: open enough they keep it open for two hours sometimes one hour sometimes sometimes keep it
[Guest]: shut they just believe it's not a priority for women you know and though there will always be
[Guest]: two or three women who want to sit there and read and write but it's a battle so those are the kind
[Guest]: of battles one had to fight initially i was very scared too because i was worried about my physical
[Guest]: security and all of that but then i just sort of told myself that it's best to be living in a
[Guest]: barrack with other women and my greatest security lie lay in being with other women and i was
[Amit Varma]: with other women and that was okay and was there the fear that this could last a long time like
[Amit Varma]: you've seen siddique kapan in jail for so long umar khalid was there a fear that oh my god like
[Guest]: i'm going in going in i don't know when i will come out that's what the state wants okay that
[Guest]: the state wants that and unfortunately there's not enough accountability in the bail courts and
[Guest]: the judicial system to ensure that doesn't happen to others so there's always that fear that it
[Amit Varma]: could have lasted much longer than it did were you you know you've seen the stick but were you
[Amit Varma]: ever shown a carrot were you ever kind of was there ever a hint that why don't you chill and
[Guest]: stop and things will get better or whatever i got a lot of indirect hints over the last 20 years i
[Guest]: mean it was through persons had not name and mention but there would be indirect in that you've
[Guest]: gone far enough now you've got one case transferred and now you've got one person arrested now enough
[Guest]: now you leave the cases now that is not necessary but you realize you're accountable to a wider
[Amit Varma]: survivor population it's not just about you and and that kind of keeps you going um so two final
[Amit Varma]: questions i've taken a lot of your time and my penultimate question is sort of a traditional
[Amit Varma]: question for all my guests who come on the show that recommend for me and my listeners books films
[Amit Varma]: music whatever gives you joy whatever you like so much that you'd just like to share it with everyone
[Guest]: oh i must mention that i just love thrillers thrillers of all kinds so i read lots of them
[Guest]: when i was in jail also so um read lots of thrillers i think they can keep you going
[Guest]: they're lighter reading for me that's just for a lighter moment many authors but i remember that
[Guest]: i think norman burke's the scalpel the sword it was a very lovely book about this uh i think it
[Guest]: i think it was this surgeon who went from the spanish civil war a very important book that i
[Guest]: read when i was growing up then of course there is uh eduardo galeano the eugen writers outstanding
[Guest]: oran pamuk is very very good and i mean i keep going back to the framing of the indian constitution
[Guest]: which sounds very uh trite but it's shiva rao b shiva rao and it basically encompasses the
[Guest]: uh the constituent assembly debates thematically of course i've also got the 18 valium constitution
[Guest]: assembly debates where i go through the sections on preamble and article 14 article 19 and i
[Guest]: realized now they're all online and i think it's very important that some of us were interested
[Guest]: and particularly young people who are concerned about how fragile indian society's commitment to
[Guest]: to equality and secularism is that we go through these debates because you realize the white
[Guest]: consensus there was around the fact that in spite and despite of partition we should remain a
[Guest]: republican constitutional democracy and i think that was an amazingly brave and sagacious decision
[Guest]: of our founding mothers and fathers and i don't think it just came out of an elite club it came
[Guest]: out from a grounded movement and realization of adivasis agriculturist workers all sections of
[Guest]: the indian people who said that no this is the only way india can survive we are so diverse we
[Guest]: are so different we are so our language our culture our religion our i mean we're so inegalitarian
[Guest]: some are rich few are very rich the rest but the only way you can do it by at least giving a vision
[Guest]: of equality so i think go back to our constitution debates i think it's important it's not boring at
[Amit Varma]: all and to add a book to that if i may i would recommend this book i don't know if you've heard
[Amit Varma]: of it called foot soldiers of the constitution yeah a lovely book i would have loved to discuss
[Amit Varma]: you know um just 2002 and the aftermath for a few more hours but people can read the book it's it's
[Amit Varma]: it's uh are you opening any films or music oh lots of films and music but i mean i simply love
[Guest]: i mean i simply love indian classical music i love jazz i am miles davis i like janice choplin
[Guest]: and of course beatles are my all-time favorite bob dylan and if you come to indian classical i mean
[Guest]: there's very little i don't like but malik arjun mansur and bhim sen joshi and i also likes many
[Guest]: times to just listen to music late evening i also like western classical very much i don't know it
[Guest]: very well but i i love listening to western classical music uh two and films all of them
[Guest]: i mean satyajit ray of course and uh igmar bergman all of them and of course i like i mean charlie
[Guest]: chaplin is a go-to for me all the time even again and again and again many many times
[Amit Varma]: and my final question if people listening to this want to help in some way whether by volunteering
[Amit Varma]: whether by contributing just in whatever way how can they reach you what can they do
[Guest]: see actually that's such an important question for us because you know thanks to all the various
[Guest]: kinds of targeting we've gone through we are an organization that proudly today functions on
[Guest]: entirely indian funds so our website cjp.org.in tells everybody where how to contribute the
[Guest]: smallest amount is important the larger amount is also welcome so of course the donations are
[Guest]: very very welcome and there's a very easy way to do it online and even otherwise the other way is
[Guest]: which is what i also tell young people is you know you can intern with us you can volunteer
[Guest]: legal research and writing narratives we've had interns from universities worldwide who've
[Guest]: interned with us writing about comparative kinds of targeted violence black violence in chicago
[Guest]: how police have behaved there compared to gujarat very outstanding work so that that's what you
[Guest]: prefer you can write to us for internships you want to write we have some of the top universities
[Guest]: sending legal interns to us even now and we get them we get about 15 to 25 interns number i can
[Guest]: handle because sometimes our team is small and that we we are looking for video volunteer people
[Guest]: who can make videos for us because we have a small team but we always need more than we have
[Guest]: so and if you if any of our any any of the volunteers want to visit our work on the ground
[Guest]: look at it cover it we are also looking for independent eyes on the ground to give us
[Amit Varma]: feedback wonderful all these relevant links will be in the show notes t-star thank you so
[Amit Varma]: much for your time i really learned a lot talking to you thanks so much amit for doing what you do
[Guest]: not just today but for all the episodes that you're doing through this because i think you're
[Guest]: reviving the kind of interest in uh you know deep deep thinking and deep diving which is so
[Amit Varma]: important today thanks thank you so much if you enjoy listening to this episode do share it with
[Amit Varma]: whoever you think might be interested check out the show notes enter rabbit holes that will do
[Amit Varma]: by t-stars books you can follow t-star on twitter at t-star settle world you can follow me on twitter
[Amit Varma]: at amit varma amit varma you can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: at seen unseen.in thank you for listening did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you